Welcome back to the show. We are joined today by Professor Michael Hudson to discuss the US national security strategy and the unraveling of the post World War II economic order. So, thank you very much for coming on the program. U we see that uh >> Oh, it's for me back. >> Yeah, sorry. [laughter] >> Thanks for having me back in this ongoing unfolding dialogue. things are happening so quickly each week. >> Yeah, it's hard to to keep up with things. I always make the point that in academia you spend very little time to follow current events. Uh but these days uh a lot of time goes to to look at this massive changes happening now by week- toeek basis. uh but uh well we often see that the political discourse so it tends to often focus I think excessively on individuals so when we look at unraveling of the political west the economic structures uh of the hegemonic order as well it's uh often attributed to Trump's personality however there's a much larger phenomenon at play here which people like you have been talking about for quite some time that is the the building blocks of this economic order is being undermined. Uh but I thought a good place we could start is uh to get your views on the how you interpret this um new national uh security strategy and yeah from I guess a somewhat economic perspective. Well, it's really doesn't uh doesn't explain the strategy as such. Uh the American diplomats are not going to come out right out and say here's our strategy. uh to to force you to to make sacrifices of your economy to promote America first and the your countries Germany, European countries, Japan, South Korea, because South Korea are also supposed to put America first, not your countries first. This reverses almost the whole last 80 years of the economic order that the American diplomats themselves put in place in 1945. And that was a time when the United States was the dominant industrial power in the wake of World War II. It was a dominant monetary power on its way to holding 80% of the world's monetary gold. by 1950 and the rest of the world actually needed American support and American interests were created were served by breaking up and absorbing the British Empire and the French Empire. And there was a long discussion that I uh quote and describe in my book superimperialism in the British House of Lords in the Parliament saying well we know that the American plans for free trade and free investment means uh no more uh sterling area with block sterling uh of India and other sterling area countries that have to be spent on British manufacturing. and British goods. Uh in reality, we know that our economy is pretty devastated. And uh this free trade and investment means America is going to pick up all of these savings that is the what we now call the global south countries have been accumulated during World War II. So this order uh sort of free trade and investment uh was an almost evangelistic ideology and it seemed that all of uh western history was moving towards free trade, free investment. Uh and the myth was that all of this would uh automatically uh stabilize and enable all the debts to be paid and all countries were going to gain uh together. Well, the this idea was a fantasy and in fact there was no anticipation at that time that America was going to end up in the position it is today. It's industrially dependent on foreign countries to provide uh industrial products that it used to produce at home and it's financially dependent by it's uh military spending abroad was uh so large that it accounted for the entire US balance of payments deficit from the time the Korean war began 1950 1951 and in those years the US balance of payments began its long secular constant move into balance of payments deficit flooding the world with dollars. Well, other countries for the next uh few decades used these dollars to uh accumulate. they turned them in to the treasury and redeemed them in gold and uh General de Gaulle but also Germany uh was turning its trade surpluses uh into dollars because all the money being spent in Southeast Asia uh ended up in French banks and uh money in other countries ended up buying imports from Germany. So uh the we used to sit at the Chase Manhattan Bank where I worked in the 1960s as their balance of payments economist. Every Friday we'd look at the Federal Reserve statement for the gold cover. How much uh gold are we losing and how much gold is legally required to back the paper currency here? Well, it was obvious that the United States is going to be forced off gold already by think 1966, 1967. And um so uh uh we could we could see where that is. Well, the United States did go off gold. And when it went off gold, it put in a system where well, if foreign central banks can't cash in their dollars for gold, what are they going to do with them? Well, there was very little that they could do except agree to the pressures from US diplomats to buy US Treasury securities. So, in effect, they were recycling all the dollars that America spent on military operations and military bases and wars throughout the world. All this was sent recycled [clears throat] to the United States to finance its uh trade deficit, its balance of payments deficit and enable the government to keep spending spending abroad at other count's expense. Well uh they finally uh this enabled the United States to de-industrialize to to not as economists say live within its means. And uh the result is that uh the national security report recognizes that uh the uh kind of free trade, free investment uh and uh uh equal sovereignty among nations principles of the United Nations that was drafted in 1945 no longer serves American interests. So what they've done is reverse this whole philosophy that uh still is held to be western values and uh they use various forms of coercion. The most obvious forms long before Trump were well you control the world's oil trade. So if you can control oil, then you're able to turn off the energy to countries that don't follow your policies. And America's policy has been uh not to create a peaceful world order uh was assumed 80 years ago, but to prepare for a war with Russia and China or at least a conflict with Russia and China. Well, the national security uh study is not going to come right out and say, "Well, we want to control the oil to turn off your power and make you look uh suffer like Germany if you don't follow the rules, the America first rules uh that we are laying down. Uh America also wants to monopolize uh information technology. the whole uh computer revolution of computer chips uh the whole uh media social media it wants to have a monopolies all of this and that means uh it doesn't want Europe to impose taxes on the American companies uh that are operating uh in Europe. It wants special privileges that no other countries have. And so the uh the Americans say, well, if we can no longer support ourselves industrially or financially, then other countries have to support us. How are we going to get other countries to support us? That's the real problem. And uh what is not uh uh acknowledged uh is the most problematic assumption that is underlies all of this national security report. The idea is that uh if that somehow if America can uh put in place so co uh coercive a trade and investment and monetary system on other countries that somehow they will uh relocate their industry from Germany, from France, from Korea and Japan uh into the United States and other countries uh are will somehow be willing to re-industrialize the United States. None of this looks at the at why the United States has de-industrialized to begin with. What are these dynamics that have made uh in industrial investment so much less remunerative than financialization and making money simply from money? Well, that's the problem that uh I think now Europe and Asia are facing. And if you look at today's financial times uh from the front page to the uh to the last page, it's all about European worries that the whole the US financial economy has become a bubble, especially the artificial intelligence uh bubble uh and the heavy debt leveraging and uh Donald Trump is following the same path that Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan followed in after 1980 deregulate the economy uh take away all all of the rules uh that uh that protect investors, protect consumers um and just uh make a free-for-all. Well, uh I think most of the money managers that I know uh and uh CEOs that I talk to all say, "Well, there's going to be a huge crash in the making. How are how are you going to prepare for it? Well, the uh national security uh report says, well, we probably have only three years to to lock in place what is going uh going going to be we hope a coercive America first order make America great again MAGA at other count's expense. And they point out that uh America's strongest backers in Europe, Macron in France, Starmer in England, and uh Frederick Merittz in Germany uh are at the nater of their popularity. the the voters realize that uh the de voters disagree with them and uh they're uh not only are their economies being sacrificed by following the policies that these three leaders in the EU leadership under Vanderan and uh Kayakalis are promoting but uh the political parties that are in power are also threatened but there's not going to be an election for the next three years. And so that gives the United States three years to have its uh ma major supporters try to put in place this uh new economic order, new new economic order that is going to uh take the place of a multilateral uh e economic order. And uh the main uh victims of this are going to be America's closest allies as usual. Uh Western European countries, the NATO countries, uh Japan, South Korea, uh and the English-speaking uh Australia and uh New Zealand. uh the it's much harder to convince uh China and Africa and the rest of the global south countries or China's Asian Eur Asian partners uh to go along with this and so the uh the report acknowledges that well the world is going to break out we break up into spheres of influence and we can't really uh prevent that but at least we can lock in America's control over Latin America. And that's why you're seeing Donald Trump saying uh uh despite the investment by China and Venezuela and Brazil uh the Latin America is our territory. These are our kleptocrats, our client oligarchies in power, our military dictatorships, and we're not going to let you in. But uh ostensibly they say, "Okay, you have your sphere. China has its sphere of influence along with Russia and Eurasia and um it's trying to uh shoehorn uh Japan into this group of five. The United States uh it's Western European satellite uh Western Europe is a satellite, Russia, China, and then that's four people, but the US wants a majority. So it has Japan that always votes with the United States. It's another satellite. Uh, and this is uh pretty fictitious because China and Russia uh immediately say, "Well, wait a minute. You you want us to stay out of Latin America despite our investments there, despite the fact that we're buying that China is buying Brazilian soybeans so that it doesn't have to depend on US soybean exports and uh the ability of the United States to weaponize its foreign trade to say, "Well, we're we can turn off our soybean trade and make you go hungry if uh you do policies that we disagree with." Uh the United uh so the but the United States is not staying out of Eurasia. It's not staying out of Europe. It's it turned uh NATO Europe into a satellite. It's not staying out of Asia. It's trying to surround China with the Philippines uh and other uh pre pressing Taiwan uh Japan. uh the it's trying to make a ring the quad uh arrangements um along with Australia uh to sort of uh ring China and uh so it it for Trump there's a the Monroe Doctrine means you stay out of South America but we're not going to stay out of your territory. So it really means the the United States can somehow maintain its unique status as the unipolar power dominating the whole world. Well, this is a fantasy and uh the uh national security report isn't going to say that it's a fantasy. They simply concentrate on the fact that well Europe has a fantasy that somehow it can be an independent actor in all of this. uh and it's it can make an independent decision to uh spend all of its economic surplus and planning on a war with Russia which is inconceivable that uh Russia can in or any other country can invade uh Europe or an Asia u a neighbor uh in today's world where wars are fought by bombs and drones and without infantries and without an infantry You're never going to occupy a country uh and take it over. You can only do it surreptitiously by backing by uh the campaigns of politicians loyal to you. Well, that's how the United States has controlled Europe by its meddling in European elections ever since 1945. Uh especially in Italy when there was a threat of the Communist Party there. uh especially in uh uh the rest of uh NATO Europe. Well, you're seeing what happened today that uh it's created a kind of Frankenstein monster out of its control. And uh here the the uh puppets that it's put in power are elected, but the puppets are on automatic pilot. War with Russia. War with Russia. We have to cut back social spending in order to uh create our own military-industrial complex to finally uh provide industrial employment that we're not able to do in the marketplace anymore because of our cutting off of trade with Russia. Well, this is a a quandry and uh the the national security report acknowledges uh the fact uh and essentially you could say that it's uh it's meant very largely for Europe because uh the other countries are uh of the world or the other regions are all pretty much fixed in the direction that they're going with. Uh these regions have the same m the choice that Europe has. Ho what is going to be their economic future? And the Trump's national security policy that isn't quite spelled out this clearly in the national security report is to confront other countries with a choice. uh either you can live for the short term and u we will uh lower the uh tariffs that Trump has imposed if and give you access to the American market for your exports. Uh but you have to do a give back. You have to follow American policy. In order for us to give you access to the American market, you have to join our our uh sanctions against Russia, China, Iran, and any other country that we designate is uh not following American policy and uh therefore our enemy. uh and you uh you have to agree to invest and move your major industrial companies out of your country into the United States. Well, uh if you uh don't do uh do this, then you're going to suffer unemployment and uh de-industrialization and layoffs and many of your uh factories are going to close down and the small companies the middleand companies of Germany are going to go bankrupt. Uh so uh the that's the the question is for Europe is is it worth avoiding this short-term disruption of their foreign trade in order to live for the long-term fact that well China, Russia and uh its uh belt and road Eurasian neighbors are the most rapidly growing economies in the world. U t if Europe uh which is really the centerpiece of this, if Europe ties its fortunes to the United States by having to relocate its industry here to invest its savings in the United States, then uh it will have to forego uh economic trade and investment relations with China, Russia and uh the global majority. That's the long-term uh gain. So, what is it going to choose? Well, politicians live for the short term and Europe's politicians have two or three years before the next elections uh and that's their time frame. And so they're willing to sacrifice Europe's long-term growth by agreeing to uh by surrendering to the uh trade policies, the givebacks and the promise of investment in the United States that Vondan uh agreed to a few months ago with Donald Trump and which the current leaders uh of Europe uh continue to support. Well, just as that makes them so unpopular with the voters, uh the it it it leads the national security authors to recognize the voters are right. Uh Europe can't possibly survive this way. But we can use this interim to lock in uh kind of uh America first international economic order uh on pretty much uh the same kind of pressure that we used in 1945 uh to serve America ends. It's just instead of a multilateral order, it's a one country take all. Our gain is your loss. uh putting America first means that we win at your expense and it's going to be Europe's expense if it wants to defend itself against Russia uh to rebuild its uh military-industrial complex. Well, that's its problem. Uh uh America's washing its hands of it. uh and it America the hope of the NS uh national security report is that somehow uh it it can promise Russia to drop the sanctions against it to make a kind of uh US investment in Russia. I mean the ideal is to do to Russia once again what Americans did to Russia in the 1990s under Boris Yeltson. uh it want it's hoping that somehow the war uh the dream of American foreign policy and the reason it failed was the assumption that uh that the war with Russia would lead uh to the population rebelling against uh Putin saying we don't want our soldiers to die. We don't want military spending. We want spending on consumer goods. We want to trade with Europe. Well, none of that happens when you bomb a country. They don't oppose the leader, they rally around the leader. U so there's a kind of fantasy underlying uh not only this report but Trump's policy and the fantasy is that other countries there don't have an alternative but to surrender to Trump. Uh and of course there there is an alternative but the alternative to make a long-term u arrange uh open trade without Eurasia uh means the short-term loss to the American market. So this is the tension that's confronting Europe and also Japan uh Korea and America's closest allies. Uh it's interesting though I I was wondering what do you see happening to Europe uh after this? I know you you covered this to a large extent now but the whole relationship between the Americans and the Europeans after World War II it had very different premise that is after World War II uh the Americans were quite generous with a lot of the the trade deals which were established. Some of it of course was just geostrategic that is you wanted West Germany to be more prosperous than East Germany. You wanted Taiwan to be more prosperous than the other China. you wanted South Korea to be more prosperous than North Korea. So it was always this strategic incentive to have generous uh trade agreements for the frontline states. In addition of course providing uh for their for their security but also as due to the economic status of the US there's an interest of course to build trust in US banks is the dollar dependence on this tech and industry and again US big business really grew a lot in the World War II period. the US became this industrial powerhouse the leading technologies uh and all of this uh possibility for dominance. Of course there was a concern for protectionism in Europe which often happens after war. So there was a need to open up these markets and as you said there was strategic interest in dismantling the European empires and absorbing them of course for the US and containing the Soviet Union. Uh so there were all this interest I mean which are yes strategic but uh all of this translated into a very privileged position for the Europeans in an open economic system and uh all of this uh in Europe instead of looking at the strategic reasons why all this happened we form kind of like this ideology of liberal democracies sticking together transcending uh the international anarchy. So um yeah, which is kind of the language that the political leadership speaks in. So they they don't refer think alliances are a temporary construct. It's uh permanent friendships based on values. You know, this is kind of language and assumptions they often run with. Uh but when you look at the specific references now to Europe in this uh national security strategy, this it's envisions a decoupling. The Europeans are portrayed, well, European leaders at least are portrayed as authoritarian, increasingly undemocratic. I would agree with this, by the way. The economic decline, hard to disagree with as well. And um and also being very irrational on Ukraine. Indeed, you see this also in the language. Now, it appears that our leaders in Europe are cosplaying World War II. The assumption that if you can defeat Russia, it's just like defeating Nazi Germany. and this will usher in a new golden era for Europe or something along those lines. And uh you even see the German leader now comparing Putin to Hitler. He argues, you know, Russia won't stop. We have to stop him. This is the main goal. I mean, this is framing offensive actions against Russia as something defensive. Uh so it's u no it's also the rules are gone. It seems we now I'm assuming that the European powers um several of them are at least assisting Ukraine in the attacks on civilian Russian ships. Uh of course the seizure of Russian funds which are illegal on their own. But even the rules within the EU are now turned on its heads. There's no more voting every six months to renew it. The EU simply the leadership decided to uh to ban this. From now on, these will be permanent seizure of Russia's funds as uh all 27 members stated now have to unanimously agree to release them, which I can't see happening. But uh but how but but again this open talk about fighting a war which they can't win. They don't have the troops. They don't have political support, the public support. It's um what of this do you see as being like just EU being systemically lost or strategically lost? There is strategic vacuum. Is it that it doesn't have a new place economic role in the new world or is it just good old-fashioned russophobia or how how do you make sense of this because uh all the things which identify the EU over the past few years this economic powerhouse the good governance uh choosing diplomacy over war and most important of all rules base this was always the thing all of this is now out the window I mean how how do you make sense of this and what does this mean for Europe's relationship with the United States even after Trump is gone. Sorry, that was a very long question, but well, you're you're right to bring up the World War II remaining the key. The United States uh is steering the world to refight World War II. Uh the United States says, you know, World War II didn't end. We're now going to finish World War II. Uh but uh we're in instead of America and uh Western Europe allied with uh uh with Russia, we're now allying with Nazi Germany. Uh we that's why we have people like Vonda and Callus and uh uh officials with family backgrounds in the Nazi movement. Uh the basically the United States, the Nazis were right in uh wanting to go to war uh against Europe and uh Japan was right in wanting to uh uh invade China and with the Nank King uh massacre. Uh the the Nazis were right in uh hating the Russian speakers in the Slavic population genetically as subhumans. the Japanese were right in treating the uh Chinese as racially uh subhuman and attract attacking them. That's why uh we are supporting uh in Ukraine the uh the uh neo-Nazi government that we continued to support right after World War II and maintain uh in uh uh in in influence uh who with their uh racist uh Nazi uh philosophy. That's why in Japan, MacArthur uh found uh the way to oppose the nent or incipient socialist movement in Japan by working with the uh the the criminal gangs to uh basically fight against uh the uh the socialists and to put uh puppet right-wing uh right-wing leaders there. So right now uh you have this uh violently passionate female uh leader in Japan uh preparing for a war with China. Uh uh the United States is trying to promote Taiwan uh to fight to the last Taiwanese uh against China uh as Japan fights to the last uh Japanese by uh threatening to fight uh over islands in the China Sea by uh putting American arms and missiles on these islands which will lead China to protect itself uh uh with a takeover. So uh the the United States basically is in the pos in the position of Nazi Germany in creating a new Nazi alliance. uh Western Europe, uh Ukraine, uh Japan, uh and using hopefully uh elements in Taiwan and other countries uh in the same way that it's uh it used uh Argentina and other right-wing dictary dictatorships in Latin America. uh and the the rest of the world is seems blind to the fact that uh the World War II is not going to be fought in the same way that World War II was. It's not going to be armies of different countries attacking each other. As I mentioned, it'll be by missiles. And uh President Putin said in the last few weeks that uh the the whole fiction of Trump's hope in making a ceasefire and an arrangement between Ukraine and Russia. Putin said uh our fight isn't with Ukraine. It's w with Western Europe. Ukraine is only the arena, the battlefield for the fight of the right-wing uh the European parties. the uh uh British Labor Party under Starmer uh Orwellian uh double speak uh name for it uh the merits Christian Democrats and uh uh Macron's uh uh party that he began as a socialist uh and then created his own party in 2016. These are the leaders uh who are sort of joining in this new uh new war and uh if uh it's really these three countries that are supplying uh arms to the Ukraine steering uh organizing its attacks on Russian uh shadow shipping for its oil uh targeting along with the Americans and with the American satellites uh the missiles. that uh are being sent from Ukraine into Russia uh to attack its oil refineries to try to disrupt its oil. Uh the uh Putin has said we will we realize that even though these missiles are coming from Ukraine, it is really not Ukraine that's doing it. Ukraine is a puppet government of the installed by the United States in Maidan in 2014 and uh now supplied with arms largely by Europe. We will u retaliate against the countries that provide that send these uh missiles uh to us and that are attacking us. And so the fight in Ukraine is the uh essentially the opening phases of uh something like World War II. And Putin has said we're we're going to start by uh bombing the factories that produce these missiles. We'll bomb the electric facilities that uh companies that provide the electricity for these. will will let Western Europe uh fight to the last European uh because uh it'll be a very uh short war and there really uh after the first few days there really won't be any Europe European leader to negotiate with anymore because there won't be a viable Europe and uh Europe has said okay it's agreed to it uh saying that you know we we think it's a bluff well that's the question is the the assumption is that Russia has been militarily weakened by the war and that it's losing to Ukraine. That's what all of the Council of Foreign Relations is saying here. That's what all of the pro- US uh uh media are saying and it's uh as you know from the guests that you've had on your show, Glenn, that it's all a fiction that that's not what's happening at all. So the uh it's uh we're what's being challenged here is you could say the materialist approach to foreign policy and in fact [clears throat] history for that matter. The assumption of the materialist approach is that countries are going to act in their economic self-interest. Well, that's not happening. Europe is not really acting in its economic self-interest or even its instinct for survival. Uh it's acting in America uh what Trump calls the America first uh interest. But the this interest isn't really that of the United States except it means that uh what is left of the remnants of uh German industry and technology um and that of France and other countries that is going to be so uh Trump and his uh team hope move to United States. Europe is going to be emptied out. It's going to uh the Western Europe is going to look like the Baltics uh losing onethird of their population uh immigrating uh for work uh losing their uh essentially just depopulating and the as the Latians say uh will will the last uh uh immigrant in 2035 please turn off the lights at the airport when you leave. Uh that seems to be the dynamic of uh depopulation uh de-industrialization uh unemployment uh that you and break up of Western Europe. Well, the fact is that before this really happens, the European Union itself is going to probably break up. That's what's seen. And that's why the United States uh in the last couple of weeks has said, "Well, we think that Italy, Hungary, the Czech Republic, uh Slovakia uh for starters should withdraw from the European Union." Well, you're seeing that uh already. What are they going to do? Where are they going to go? Uh the uh you you mentioned the whole fight that's occurred over the conf uh euroair confiscation of the 250 billion uh dollars uh equivalent of the Russian uh national uh savings that it put uh in Europe wants to give this to Ukraine. Well, not really to Ukraine. It's Europe wants to give it to its own military industrial complex to uh build factories. It doesn't intend any money at all, actual money to go to Ukraine because it would all be stolen as you've also seen in the last few few weeks of all of the uh exposees of uh of the money that's been siphoned off. maybe onethird of all the money that's been spent in Ukraine ends up in in the pockets of the kleptocrats that uh have taken uh power and made Ukraine for the last 15 years according to the World Bank the most corrupt country in the northern hemisphere. Well, do they really want to give any money to this obviously corrupt uh country? Well, they don't. So uh except that the a lot of this money that they give to Ukraine has all been recycled back to the European leaders who've been approving the money to Ukraine. It's a circular flow. uh the European leaders got a black back flush of into their own u campaigns and personal accounts and uh uh for for all of this uh it's not really spent on Ukrainian defense at all. That's why Ukraine's losing so much. That's why there are so many desertions from the army with the soldiers saying, "Wait a minute. Uh, we were supposed to have uh barriers uh built up here. We were supposed to have all this uh military support. None of this support was ever made. Uh it seems that the generals in charge of the money have just put it all in their pockets." Well, that's the situation we have. This is uh not a stable situation. That's why it's unfolding week by week. And I think every week that you have your guests on uh there's a new story, a new revelation, a new uh shift in uh this uh balance that is very rapidly uh unfolding in a way that it's very hard to forecast uh whether there's going to be an uh a risk of an accident happening. That seems to be the case. >> Yeah. You know, I think uh I think the model many envision in their head is uh to almost emulate the British and the US offshore balancer strategy. That is have a first your proxies fight um much much like in World War II have them exhaust each other. That is using Ukraine to exhaust Russia. And once uh once this war comes to an end, the assumption would be that if Russia isn't lost, then at least it would be so exhausted that towards the end some powerful western country would step in and uh then be able to dictate the outcome of the war. So, but of course this is very different. uh Russia slowballed this um to a large extent in order to also make sure that it could make preparations for a wider war because you know as you said they know who's pulling the strings behind. So from what I'm hearing they have now the oresnik on mass production they are uh and also signaling clearly that if the Europeans plan to enter this war and attack Russia then this will not they will not be fighting brotherly Ukrainian people they will be fighting uh western Europeans in which the yeah the gloves would come off in terms of the weaponry that they would deploy. So, I think we're walking down the very dangerous path and also now that the Americans have well trying to hand this whole thing over to the Europeans uh and the Ukrainians are, you know, falling apart on the front line. The the Russians will be the Europeans will have this incentive to step on step up much harder on the Russians. So, more direct attacks while the Russians will now see that they have more freedom to act. that is uh if if you have British or French uh planes or drones flying across, you know, along the Black Sea to pick targets which should be struck, why why would the Russians let them do this? I mean, I think you're going to see a much heavier hand by the Russians, they will start to shoot these things down and uh just at a time when the EU is also stepping up its aggressive posture. So I think the yeah the illusion of escalation dominance in Europe it's going to it's going to lead to a disaster probably sooner than later. But uh uh do you have any final thoughts on where we are moving beyond the economic? >> Well America was not exhausted by World War II. America and uh emerged World War II much stronger industrially and financially than it was uh before World War II. Same thing with uh even Germany had uh increased its indust industry uh during during World War II. Uh Russia obviously is uh in has become much more rapidly growing during the uh Ukraine uh war than uh NATO Europe. Uh so it's just a fantasy that Russia is somehow the economy is falling apart. uh the uh that's exactly the opposite is happening and that's what the American military uh and state department and American diplomats can't uh acknowledge. And here's the problem. It's a bureaucratic problem with America's national security reports. Uh there's uh a feeling that uh uh you you have many researchers in the CIA and other agencies that are reading the Russian speeches, the Russian newspapers, and uh they they say, "Well, the the reality that we're getting from the battlefield and from the speeches is just the way that you've described, Glenn. uh Russia's getting stronger and uh the uh the force to uh come with a single uniform re uh report is that well if you think that Russia is getting stronger and that Russia's winning the war in Ukraine then you're uh Putin's puppet you are you must be sympathetic with Russia you're saying that because you want to believe that Russia's getting stronger and that is not a patriot otic thought uh and uh people who are uh the reality based uh observers uh decide that well with advancement closed off uh in the CIA and with having no receptiveness for the reality that they're describing uh they leave uh Ray McGovern who used to work for the CIA has been very uh uh explicit in describing this uh either agree with this or leave uh our way or the highway. Uh and uh so the uh the CIA, the State Department, uh the milit the Pentagon have a bureaucracy of yesmen who are not going to disagree uh or point to the flaws in this strategy. And this is what's so crazy. There's there's no real open dialogue or checks and balances. And it's as if everybody believes what's reported in the uh New York Times and Washington Post, the pro-war uh anti-Russian uh neocon neoliberal uh press. So there's a a lack of understanding either of the enemy or oneself. And as Lousy said in the uh art of war, you know, if you don't understand yourself and you don't understand your enemy, you're sure to lose. So uh that is the it's sort of a built-in bureaucratic structuring of u the mentality at work that is guaranteeing uh a walk into disaster. >> Yeah. No, it's uh the whole thing is very frustrating to watch from Europe, I would say, because there's uh all the things which we should have been done uh we're doing exactly the opposite. That is uh if you see the US in decline, relative decline, uh dep prioritizing Europe, you know, you would then end the dividing lines in Europe. You would uh seek to make peace with the Russians. Everything would be in place really for this though. I mean uh the you know the the whole reason why we had to split from the Russians and redivide Europe was to give NATO a a stronger role or dominant role in the postcold war era. But now we we we could really fix everything by by restoring relations with Russia improving relations with China. Instead we're throwing away all the other relationships in the hope that the US might stay after all. It's a it is incredibly frustrating to to to to watch and whenever they are called on it that why why aren't we taking a different approach? Why not just uh settle relations with Russia? They get some crazy answers. Well, we can't betray Ukraine. But you know this confrontation with Russia is what destroys Ukraine or you get some fantasies about uh you know Putin being Hitler. They want to conquer Europe. All all of this nonsense. Uh there's and again as you suggested that there's there's no real discussion when this is the main logic that um uh that uh yeah Russia's this yes the USSR is the Russian Empire just want to conquer all of Europe and anyone who disagrees is a Putinist uh is a great way of making sure that there is no debate because it's either agreeing with the nonsense or being a traitor effectively. So it's um no it's very extremely frustrating to watch and I it's also one of the consequences I think now of u of Europe essentially betraying all the core values it argued that it was standing for so >> well the national security report wants to blame European leaders Macron and Starmer and merits for this but the what's what's really stirring them all really is the United States the national security uh report in criticizing Europe doesn't say it's the United States that has installed these leaders uh who specifically support the US policy uh certainly prior to Trump under Biden and I think Trump still holds this same policy of confrontation with uh Russia confrontation with China uh the the there's sort of a good cop bad cop in uh US in negoti iations between uh the American block uh and Russia, China, and the global majority. Uh the US uh Trump is trying to say, "I'm the good cop." Uh and Europe is the bad cop, but actually they're both bad cops. Uh Trump is trying to s to make it appear as if he wants the peace prize. Uh but he he know he doesn't want the peace prize. He's wants to uh conceal the fact that he's the most warlike leader that America has had. Uh but he he's trying to conceal it by saying, "Well, war I'm for war for peace. Peace is my business, not war." uh when actually he's uh fully in line which along with Rubio as his secretary of u state and of uh the Senate uh Senate leadership uh they're uh Mitch McConnell uh they're all uh the they're all neocons they're all neoliberals in the same boat but they're they're if they can get the Europeans to blame its own leaders and somehow elect uh pretty people another sort of European Zalinski who says he wants peace and then immediately turns around and follows uh whoever is giving him the paycheck uh to make war. That's the American dream. So the Europeans uh I I think think there's beginning to be an anti-Americanism in Europe and you see that in the Financial Times saying Europe has to realize it has to go its own way. It has to be independent and it has to talk about uh what where is our real economic interest and our real military interest uh in all of this and how does it diverge from what uh President Trump is trying to impose with his America first make America great again uh with your own your foreign resources as if somehow uh foreign resources can re-industrialize America without America having to change its the whole way in which its own economies structured. The fact is that Europe and the United States have a malstructured financialized economy. This is the real problem and it's also uh not a very uh it's lost its democratic uh uh context for the economy. everything is uh changed and all that the United States and Europe has to promote this uh worldview is uh a fictitious narrative and the fictitious narrative is broadcast through uh politician statements and the public media and uh who are you going to believe your eyes or the public media that's the that's the question who are the European voters obviously re reject reject the policy uh of their leaders and they don't realize that their leaders themselves are sort of American American puppets uh uh not whereas the uh speak proponents of the alternative are not Putin's puppets they're they're the realists uh and they they realize there's no need for war it's fictitious uh it's not that they're pacifists but there's just no need for war and there's no war that Europe can in against Russia now that it doesn't have any more arms. It's used them all up in Ukraine and send sending them to Israel. Uh so it it's disarmed. It has no money. Its industry is unable to operate without uh in the inexpensive oil and gas that powered it uh before. Uh there's been no uh accounting for what are the costs and benefits of the future. It's so obvious when when once you sit down and do it, that's not what the National Security Report comes right out and acknowledges. And that that's the real problem that American uh it's as if the American establishment doesn't know what is in its own self-interest. It's so pulled into this neoliberal neocon uh war with Russia mentality that's been in place uh for the last 40 years. Well, Professor Hudson, thank you so much for your time and uh this is uh yeah, interesting times. So, thank you. >> Thanks for having me, Clint.