Welcome back. We are joined today by Professor Richard Wolf to discuss the economic crisis that is now seemingly unavoidable and also the political fallout from this. So um thank you for coming on and I was uh hoping we could start with uh Europe because uh you know if we went back 20 years ago or even yeah 20 years would be enough. uh Europe was a model which was studied at the universities in terms of uh why it was so successful and it seemed that if the European model uh had its success by having states unify to increase trade with each other uh use collective bargaining power to gain a position of strength with the rest of the world and the assumption was that economic interest would then fuel the political loyalties further that is um to intensify the integration between the European states as this was in their self-interest. Um now this is no longer the case things are starting to look pretty dark now in Europe. Uh what do you see actually happening now from from your viewpoint? uh because if we look at the top three economies that is France, Germany and uh the United Kingdom, they all seem to be in somewhat deep trouble uh threatening to pull down the rest. Yes. Well, for for for the United States and let me preface by uh you know in the interest of transparency uh my father was born in France and my mother in Germany and I have spoken French and German all my life even though I was born in the United States and I have worked all my life and lived here in the United States with my family. Uh so I have always had if you like one foot in Europe and one foot uh in in the United States and I've always looked to Europe partly for those reasons as sort of the the center of the world the the the place from which the great literature the the great science the great you fill in the bl you know Napoleon and and and all the rest of it uh as the place to go as the as the renaissance, the reformation, the the French Revolution, the the the revolutions of 1848, the Russian revol incredible historic transformation, the rise of Marxism, uh socialism, all of that. uh was it European? And it all seems now over. And I share that perspective with Americans across the political spectrum. If you talk to the rightwing, they say this with disdain and dismissiveness. I wouldn't do that. I that's not where I come from. I do it with a lot of sadness and and and a sense of something valuable that I hope will be preserved even as the rest of it falls apart. Uh so it is a it is a sense of a a part of the world that is becoming increasingly irrelevant to almost everything that grabs my attention and the attention of my fellow citizens here. Now part of that view is also a complicated shodenfer you know a little bit of a of a jealousy of Europe and a sense they're worse off than we are and it softens the need to face the things in the United States that are not so different from the European. You know, we c our empire came after yours, but it is declining now. Yours has a longer history of decline, but we are repeating this history in more ways than we like to admit as a society. And we are frightened. I think that's the best way to describe it. We are frightened by the fact that we now have a very serious economic competitor. And I I need to remind everyone if you don't do economic history that we haven't had a serious economic competitor for a century. The Soviet Union never was an economic problem for the United States. It pretended that it was, but it never was. You know, even today, the the GDP of the United States is roughly 38 trillion and the GDP of Russia is about four, you know, four trillion, maybe five, but you know, utterly in an elephant and a mouse. This is nothing. China with its whatever it is now 181 19 trillion that's the serious competitor. China plus the bricks is now a much much bigger richer economic unit than the United States and the G7 around it. So any way you look at it the dominance of the United States is in serious decline. It's a little different from Europe because we can date the decline to the end of World War II when we entered into this anomalous situation that the United States had this extraordinary position of you know the dollar suddenly the world currency the British pound is out of the story America accounts for half the world output and half the world's trade and and just a total dominance which in a way of course should have been recognized as the anomalous situation that wouldn't last for more than a decade if that but it was not interpreted in the United States that way. uh given the messianic religious um atmosphere of the United States, it was decided instead that the United States was a totally exceptional society and that its economic dominance was the fruit of God's preference for Americans over everybody else. all of that and a serious notion that this would simply prevail indefinitely. And so it was no there was no expectation that anyone would ever catch up. And so we have the peculiar decline experience now that is decline accompanied by shock by disbelief by an immense amount of denial uh academics denying it uh pundits media all of it. My sense in Europe is while there's some of that there too of course that they've been they've been having to go through it for a longer time and there therefore there's more of a pessimism slash realism about the decline. uh hoping that it doesn't go too far too fast, but an a sense of a kind of exhaustion and a sense that that between the United States on one hand and China, India and all of that on the other that the Europeans are simply becoming a tourist mecca uh but not much else. How do you see the unity in U Europe holding together? Because we even keep referring it to as Europe, but uh uh you mentioned um the uniqueness or or temporary condition of the US dollar and the amount of economic concentration in the United States. But another unusual development after World War II has been the unity of the European states. uh of course under US leadership but also premised to a large extent on the continued dominance of the political west. But uh one has to ask though why why why would countries like Ireland and Bulgaria uh Greece and Latvia what do they actually have in common in terms of economic interest? What is the foundation for the uh for the political cohesion between them? Because uh as I started off saying in the '9s and 2000s, one can argue that uh the EU was this economic project. Everyone had an interest in pulling their sovereignty and the EU would then deliver tangible goods to its member states. But these days, it's very hard to make that argument. Indeed, the EU itself recognizes, no, we're now a geopolitical Europe, which means uh I guess confronting Russia. But uh this doesn't seem to be enough in the long run to hold the continent together. >> No, I don't think it is either. And I think what you're seeing, look, it it's a gamble. On the one hand, you have all of the forces that split the European countries one from the other. The history, the religion, the the language, the all of it. On the other hand, you do have a sense that we live in a world of giants. The US, China, Russia, so forth. We have to be big and strong in our bigness. This is a terrible tension, but I don't think they have figured out how to deal with it. I think the mistake is at the beginning. I think it was a unification done by, if you allow me, the employer class. It was organized by them. It was organized for them. And it was organized with a deep historical disdain for the working class as a partner. And I think that led them to create very bad feelings, very bad tendencies towards impatience. Seeing the unification as what it in many ways was, a ploy, a tactical maneuver of the employer class uh to threaten or take away the the social welfare that the left, the working class had won uh in Europe in the in the interwar period and and and afterwards a little bit. uh and I think that meant you did not have the unification classwise to make this political economic project perhaps have a a sense the working class never had the power uh or the uni unity to do the unification for it. So it didn't want what the employer class wanted. It suffered that but it wasn't happy. And what that meant was inside every country the opposition to what was emerging took the form not of siding on a class basis which it could have and probably should have but instead challenging the unification that this unification we don't want this we don't want you know everybody want doesn't want to be dictated by Brussels about what should have all it takes this national form, this uh struggle over country versus EU and all of that th this is a recipe for endless fighting and for endless loss of you know first Hungary then Czech Republic now perhaps Slovakia. Who knows at what point the internal conflict you know I know a little bit about France. I know that uh Melon Shaw has many people in the left who are not happy about the EU at all. And I'm assuming I don't know but I'm assuming that on the right Le Pen and all those forces likewise include more than a few Euroskeeptics etc etc. So I I think what Europe has done is closed off because of its political ideological shape any of the long shots that they were that might have been able to congeal. Yeah. I I am not unmindful that the population of of EU is bigger than that of the United States. That the number of you know that that they have the economic basis that they could challenge for sure certainly but they seem really unable and I I I don't want to overstate it. I'm sure you've had other guests who have, but but the quality of the leadership, Macron, Meritz, Starmer, wow. Even from this country with the laughable leader we have, it does look like the Europeans are in very bad shape. And then then when you add this which to us looks you know and we are the home of the cold war even here it's over the top the European craziness about Russia Putin and all of it. What is this for? Saving their political reputations. I get that they can, you know, these are all politicians raised from childhood in the Cold War, subservience to the United States, enemy Soviet Russia. But, you know, that ended in 1989. This really is a different situation. So maybe it's useful for them. It gives them something because otherwise if they cannot run on the condition in their society, it's unspeakable. I read, you know, I I I keep up. I mean, I read what you read every day and and all it is is a continuous assault on social democracy. And this this is even by the Labor Party, you know, the the party that put it in is now taking it out. And this is not this is not a a recipe for any kind of renaissance of Europe at all. >> No. um massive hatred, compulsory hatred of Russia is uh it's uh very sick and uh strange uh to say the least. Uh but um it I think it also serves a purpose though to reflect their own virtuousness because if u if the Russians are so bad, you know, they are so good, it's it's a good way of uh you know, framing us versus the other. But in terms of uh the the the prospect for Europe recovering um there hasn't been that many good proposals yet. It appears that the Germans are going with this military caninism that is uh they can't build cars anymore that are competitive with China. So they're going to start building tanks. Uh but how do you see the foundation though for um for for yeah I guess building a new Europe based on a military industrial complex? >> Well, I I you know I don't I I don't believe in prediction. I I I I have no better grasp on what's going to happen than anybody else, which is to say no grasp at all. But I cannot imagine a worse choice for Europe to be making. you really want to compete with the United States, Russia, and China, that's going to be a long shot for anyone anywhere to achieve. I mean, they spend way more money. You know, he thinks it's big, 800 um if I have it roughly 800 million uh 800 billion dollars over 10 years. We spend that every year. and China and Russia spend similar. You're not going to catch up. All the new technology in the military is being done by these two giants. You're not going to rep you'd have to it will take you 10 years to develop the infrastructure with which maybe then you but you are making a longshot bet. You're putting all your marbles in that bet. This Wow. This strikes me as very strange. I I can see the meeting where the generals in NATO or the generals in Germany sit down with the politicians and say uh if you rely on the German military you're mil your you will be a thirdass army in a first class war. The only way you can be in this war is if you buy the equipment either from the United States or from Russia and China. But you're not an independent player here. You you can't it is not it's not available to you. It's just not available. And the Russians, you know, they take their model, I guess, as the Russians because that's who they're fighting now. But that's a mistake also. The Russians made that bet, but they made it from a much stronger position and with a real ally. Europe has neither of those. It doesn't have a strong foundation for it and it doesn't have a reliable ally. The United States looks at Europe now as a loser and a loser where yes, we get some benefits, but mostly we have we're being held back. The whole this whole thing with Ukraine for them this is this is over. They want to get on with business. They don't want this. No matter what happens, it's not interesting for them. They are being depleted and having money problems and they don't want this. The Europeans want it and they and they're really laboring under a notion that carrying the eur Europeans now is is no longer a lo a valuable. We don't need them. Uh they need us and it's a waste of our time, energy, and money. Yeah. one gets the impression listening to the European leadership that they don't understand how much the world has changed including the relationship between the United States and Europe because uh you know they make this arguments um especially in terms of the war with Ukraine that you know the Europe will not permit the US to do this Europe will not you know you can't do this without Europe and they they kind of built themselves up in a big way but when you talk to to various American diplomats and others just the the rhetoric is very different. There's almost a disdain for the Europeans now. The Yeah, as you said, the the the weakness, but uh >> if I could just interject, they both say Europe this is a European problem. the Europeans in order to enhance their position. But the goal of the United States in saying that is because it doesn't want to have anything to do with this. This they have demoted the issue to such a point that let the eur when they say let the Europeans handle it, it's because it's beneath their interest. It's not they don't care what happens. All they want is a settlement that will allow them uh to to rebuild their military resources and and to counter the Chinese. That's that's their their concern. Now that look, all of this could change. I I don't mean to suggest that we are frozen in all of this. The collision course with China is itself a problem here in the United States. It's not a resolved matter. And you're going to see, my guess, you're going to see in the years ahead, slowly but regularly, the emergence of a whole another direction in politics, which will be the language may differ, but the bottom line of it will be the future requires sitting down with the Chinese and dividing the world and that's going to be put forward as a cheaper, better policy than the Republican and Democratic parties pivoting to Asia, confronting China. All of that is going to be portrayed as dangerous, ineffective, and expensive. And the alternative as less likely to have a war, much cheaper, and therefore allowing resources to deal with the splits inside the United States, which are becoming dangerous for the survival of this society. and that argument will be put forward uh and it will become effective in this country. So that's an interesting point because as we do this calculation of the US clashing with China the you know trying to defeat the Russians all of this uh you know in the back of this whole thing is of course a massive economic crisis which will come our way. Uh but what are you looking at then uh primarily in terms of the different variables? Are do you expect a cry uh crash in the AI in the AI bubble? Do you see a destruction of the dollar? What is it that I guess keeps you up at night? >> Yeah. Right. >> Framing it like that. >> The dollar the dollar I see the dollar more as a gradual. So I I don't expect that to be uh the kind of thing that precipitates or that shocks so much. You know, it's been going on for 30 40 years already and and there's there are adjustments to it. So no, I don't expect that. Yes, we are due for a recession in this country. Uh the AI bubble is an obvious uh choice of what might precipitate it. Um there are other choices too. I'll give you a couple. One is the level of inequality. It the the United States cannot handle this level of inequality. First of all, it is tearing the country apart. Whatever you hear, that's the issue. It's the it it is the way Americans think about economics, about their own economy, about their own personal situation. It's always about my income and what I can afford to buy relative to other people. that that that and the envy for Elon Musk or Warren Buffett or Bill Gates or any of the other Bezos and the others is always articulated as oh my god what he must be able to buy because you know a billion dollars you it's hard to understand what it is anyway. uh and the level of inequality in this society is now it's unsustainable. And I say that as an American who was born and lived my entire life in the postw World War II era. and everything I learned in the American school system that I went through and my life here uh including my life as a university professor has taught me that the the United States believed itself to be a middle class society where everybody is in the middle. There are, yes, there are a few rich people, movie stars or spectacular athletes or something like that. And there are a few poor people. They're probably mentally challenged or they have a drug problem or something like that. But all the usual people, we are all in the middle class. We dress alike, we go to school, we we talk in a similar way, etc., etc. And that has now been destroyed. And it took a while for people to understand it wasn't their own situation. It's a social they they they got that now. That's a social uh development. But since they were promised a middleclass life, since many of them grew up in a middleclass life, they are acutely aware of what they're not getting. They're acutely aware that the what was promised to them as the reward for behaving well and dressing well and and going to school and studying and all of that is false. the the the the so-called gener generation Z here, you know, the people born in the late 90s up to around 2012 uh are ext if you look at the statistics very unemployed, very depressed, very dependent on drugs, just it's extraordinary even just compared with the cohort above them. So you have a mounting crisis in which people are receptive to MAGA Mr. Trump because he promises to make America great again which for them is a return to what was supposed to happen for them but never did with a dawning recognition that it's not happening and that Mr. Trump. You can already see it now. He is in greater difficulty with each passing day. But the reason for that is not the Epstein file or anything like that. The reason for that is a mass of Americans who themselves are in trouble and who are telling their elderly brothers, sisters, mothers, and fathers that their problems are not being solved, that this system isn't working. The election of Mandani, Zoran Mandani as mayor of New York and I'm sitting here. I voted for him. You know, he was he was on my ballot was not an advocacy of socialism. I wish it were. It was not. I tell you I I'm sad, but it was not. It was a vote against, if you like, you can call it capitalism. If most people wouldn't, they would call it a vote against our economy is not working properly or some language like that. Uh because they still hold on to the possibility. But they are very angry for the New Yorkers to vote for a socialist Muslim has to take a a big step given what they have done in the past. Uh so I think the United States is at a a very big turning point inside and then there is the desperation of this leader. This is a this is the proverbial loose cannon. I have no idea what this adventure in Venezuela is about. But it is very obvious that the presence of Russian and Chinese ships that are now down there in the ocean right off of Venezuela. I mean that's the Monroe doctrine. Where is it? Either the United States prevails there or it doesn't. I don't know what Maduro, the Russians, and the Chinese are planning to do or but could that be a tipping point? Yes. And then you have to ask yourself the question, which in this case I think is very important. It may seem as a symbol, but it's more important than that. Plus symbols can be very important. Over the last two, three months, Mr. Trump has authorized the killing of about 85 people in little fishing boats around Venezuela and that part of South America. These are people who in the past would have been approached by an American naval me vessel. They would have been required to stop. They would have been inspected. If they were carrying drugs, those would be con confiscated. They would be arrested and taken to wherever they came from. Suddenly, we don't stop the boat. We don't arrest them. There is no evidence. There is no lawyer. There is no jury. There is no judge. summary execution on the word of the president violates everything. And just for your audience to be clear, United States has a very serious drug problem and has for at least the last half century, if not more. We arrest people for drug trafficking all the time in this country. We do not kill them. This is not a capital crime. It is not published in the punished in the United States by execution. These people receive if they're found guilty in a court where they have a lawyer and the right to to to question. If they are found guilty in that way, they get a prison sentence. Nobody can. What is he doing? What in the world would make you do? If the answer is he's got to make a case that there's drugs in Venezuela. By the way, there are drugs in every Latin American country, lots of them. But if he's going to play this game, that is an awful high price to pay. Why would you do that? What kind of mentality makes you vulnerable? Even here in the United States, even among Republican party officials, questions are raised about the blatant illegality of what he's doing. Now, you're right. If you want to say to me, is there any movement to stop it? The answer is no, there isn't. And that's very significant. bought this these are ex even for Mr. Trump. These are extraordinary, extraordinary things. So I think the potential for all of this to very quickly morph into a global crisis. Absolutely. Absolutely. And if China, you know, China doesn't want to do it, I understand that. Why should they? They have performed better than anybody else for 25 years under Pox Americana. For that, you know, if if you have even a little bit of a Hegel scholar in your background, you will understand that there is something charming about the degree to which American dominance fueled and enabled China. And then of course you'll remember that the British Empire fueled and enabled the American. So I mean this isn't the first time to say the least. But there is something when you add America and Britain were after all Anglo-Saxon blah blah blah and these are Chinese communists versus the west. But nonetheless, that's the dominant story. And I think people here are very very worried. Many more the the most sophisticated across the political spectrum, their worry takes the form, but I think it's the same issue, but it takes the form never have we felt the level of hatred, bitterness. Uh if you pay attention, you'll see it. Margie Taylor Green, an extreme right-winger, uh has a falling out with Trump and she immediately goes on television to fear for her family that people will come at night and kill her family. Mr. Trump angry about uh some officials who reminded the military that it is illegal to follow an unlawful order from a superior threatens to have them executed for treason. You know these are not casual things and these are not exceptional. This has become uh the language. Well, uh, a lot of this comes, of course, from the shift in the distribution of power and, um, the economic insecurities, the crisis. I mean, the you can it's almost unrealistic to assume that the yeah, the economic problems coming our way that they wouldn't uh result in some political madness as what we're seeing now. I mean, even only a few years ago, if you would have told me that the US president was just ordering attacks on fishing boats uh suspected of carrying drugs around Venezuela, it is it is a yeah, crazy new time. But I my my my last question though was was about how you see the relationship between uh the United States and Europe shifting now given that the US is changing not just its priorities and its uh yeah and its um uh capabilities in terms of how much yeah the money it has but also it position in the world but as both Europe and America begins to have more and more political instability how do you expect the transatlantic relationship to work cuz I've I've been told by that that by an American colleague that the discussions they're having in Washington more or less goes around you know looking at different uh new models for how they should deal with the Europeans. So should they make the Europeans into a exclusive economic block for the United States by you know telling them to sever off ties with others or should the United States extract more wealth from the Europeans have some of the industries transferred across the Atlantic? I mean it's um either what direction one goes. Uh certainly the relationship won't be as it was in the past. >> No, but I I I see everything you say. I agree with it all. But I I see it much more fluid at this point. Um they want to disconnect from Europe in the way that they have in the past. They do not they do not want they don't think they need an ally against socialism and communism. Remember the hysteria about the Soviet Union also runs deep in the United States. That's part of why you you even have it. You you caught it more from here than anywhere else. This this this lunatic ferocity about everybody is Stalin. So if Stalin is dead, well, Putin will become Stal, whoever they get, we will make a Stalin out of him. Uh they don't need Europe for that. They thought they did. And after World War II, you can make you can make a case that they did, you know, in the first the Gaul government had communist party people in the cabinet positions. You remember the struggle over dividing Greece up between the West and East and the the complicated role of Yugoslavia and the the ComicCon countries. All of that, all of that is now understood not only to be over but to be erased. In other words, uh you got to hold back the Eastern European. That's [clears throat] a joke is made. You have to hold back the Eastern Europeans because they are so angry or something at the the Russians they will overshoot the mark. And then they have the the Estonia and Latia and Lithuania, the people who talk crazy and are seen to be a bit crazy about all of this. So they don't they don't want to be supporting Europe anymore. They're very suspicious that they were bested in the deal to provide military cover uh for the Europeans. So that they didn't need the Europeans to pay for the military stuff that they they didn't want the Europeans to have any role there. They they didn't trust them and they didn't want that. All of those things are now kind of gone. They uh they don't expect much from the Europeans. Nothing of that I'm aware of. Nothing of great military importance was acquired by the American military from their European the opinion of the European military here in this country. And I'm no expert on military so I'm not a good judge but I can tell you what the overwhelming opin opinion is. useless. Very few people in uniform, very little competence among them, very little experience, very thin support, um, and an anubious attitude relative to the general population. So, they don't see much in the way of an ally here. Uh, they would like the money. They do understand that there is enormous wealth accumulated in Europe. And they're right about that. And Mr. Trump is doing what they would all like to do, and that is get the Europeans to view the United States as the insurer of their situation. Uh, but not not anymore by being the military superpower, but by actually giving money. I mean, did you notice he goes he every European leader starting with Starmer and Vanderland the deal is I will lower the tariff from maybe 20 30% to 15%. But you've got to commit to a 10-year purchase of liqufied natural gas from us. and you have to commit to 67 800 billion dollar worth of investment here. That that last one and both of them, but the last one in particular strikes me as remarkable. You are demanding of European politicians that they're going to have to defend to their European voters the fact that hundreds of billions of dollars raised inside, I don't know, the Netherlands or Sweden or France or Germany is going to be invested in the richer US. This is not going to be easy to to make you look like anything other than what you are, which you've just sold it out. And the United States is saying, "We don't care if you don't want to do that. We will just hollow out your economy from inside. Your in your your capitalists will have to come here one way or another. And we will you [clears throat] will be a place to which people retire. You you will be what those parts of your country have already been only now it'll include London and and Berlin and Paris and so forth. They will be very elegant places for retirees and tourists. And I I have heard senior people that I know personally talk like that. Well, uh you see the rhetoric in Europe though, it's uh they essentially see the massive changes in the world, economic uncertainties, shift in power, new challenges and threats. So the the logic is oh well, we're going to have to this is really a time for the political west to stick together. Uh we need US, US needs us. That's all we have to do. to commit fully to this which uh is why they're also willing to ignore a lot of their basic national interest especially the economic interests in order to cement this partnership. I I don't think they can that they appreciate what's being said on the other side of the Atlantic because it's uh it's milking time almost. It's it's time to get paid. Uh and uh again on on that side they see it more pragmatic. If if we're going through these hard times, then we're going to have to shift our priorities. We can devote less resource to Europe, but we should extract more. It's just it's it seems to me that the Europeans leadership that uh that they don't really grasp some of the key dilemmas and uh as they move forward and ignore their economic interests and national interest. uh I think they will fuel a massive uh unhappy citizenry who will begin after a while to look for more radical alternatives as yeah the political crisis and political illegitimacy begins to really take hold. >> Final thoughts. >> Yeah. No, I really think it's a very good point the way you put it. There's there's a misunderstanding. The look I was surprised maybe put it this way. I was surprised again given my history, my family at the level of hostility to Europe when Mr. Trump articulated they have cheated us and abused us and exploited us referring to the Europeans in this way. I thought that that would be so strange and so new and so different from what we had been told for decades that it would have much more push back than it has had. So I'm afraid that that is evidence that this attitude it's not that people agree with him but they have no no feeling for Europe to push back. So they accept that argument not very deeply but it's repeated over and over again. So I can and there's very little again when you see people talking about our European allies Lindsey Graham uh an extreme rightwing and and kind of silly senator but he articulates a group and he's been there a long time. That's a complete that's not that's Europe because he's an unreconstructed anti-left special. He's a cold warrior and for him that never stopped. And as far as he's concerned, Russia and the Soviet Union, it's all the same. Europeans have to see that differently for all the obvious reasons, but here in the United States, I I know it's hard for Europeans every time I try to explain this, but the senator who's his good friend Tuberville from Alabama is famous for explaining when he won the race for senator how he was going to dedicate himself, as everyone in his family has, to fight the communists. And then he gave a disquisition about his father who fought in World War II started the family on that tradition. And among the 30 reporters covering, not a single one was able to say to him, "In World War II, we were allied with the Soviet Union. We weren't fighting communists, you moron." Right? Nobody. And in this country, Russia remains the Soviet Union. If you try to explain to them that this is not the case, and there, by the way, Mr. Trump, for whatever odd reason, is not that. He gets it. He He actually understands that Putin's Russia is not whatever you thought of the Soviet Union. There are significant differences, but for many in here in the United States, no. No. And and they they they have a remaining sympathy. They do. I don't want to deny it for Europe. They agree that the Europeans haven't behaved. They're perfectly okay with hitting the Europeans with a tariff. And it's okay to make them buy our gas. And it's okay to make them invest. But you should support them against Russia. That they think is very important because the United States shouldn't have to do that all by itself. >> Yeah. No wonder then that uh the Ukraine war is used as the main instrument by the Europeans to keep you the US on the continent. So >> it's the only way. It's the only way at this point. >> Well, thank you for taking the time and uh letting me pick your brain. So, uh, yes, have a great day. >> You, too. And thank you for your program, Glenn. It's it's one that I watch, my students watch, and it it's an important service that we are grateful for. >> Thank you. Tell your students I appreciate it. So, >> all right. I will. >> Bye.