We are joined today by Professor Michael Hudson, uh, world famous and best-selling economist. So, welcome back to the program. >> Well, thanks for having me back, Glenn. >> So, recently the Secretary of State Marco Rubio explained that uh the post-war global order is not just obsolete, it is now being used against us. And uh it is uh >> that's what it means obsolete. It it it's working just the way it was supposed to, but America's no longer the beneficiary. >> Oh, exactly. And uh for me, I thought a bit about uh the whole what was previously referred to as free trade empire. If you are in the hegemonic position, often this system can work to your advantage. If it's not, free trade is uh yeah expected to be replaced with what can be called fair trade. uh but uh it is interesting about the post-war global order because there is a I guess growing sentiment that the post World War II economic order has indeed come to an end. Uh and the US is therefore pursuing its own alternative. It's unclear more in more precise terms what this exactly entails. While at the other end, we're developing also on the other side bricks as an alternative um uh to transition away from the seemingly uh failed or uh post World War II economic order that has ended. So there's it might be an oversimplification, but there seems to be at least these two different pathways. So I really want to explore with you what both the United States and bricks and vision to replace this uh postworld war II era with. And indeed you wrote or sent me recently a chapter on this and you referred to yeah a similar um yeah problem as a civilizational conflict. I was wondering yeah if you can flesh out this idea. Well, by civilizational conflict, I mean the way in which society and the economy are going to be organized. And uh you you begin the dis your question with uh the 1944 1945 uh post-war order. And the United States at Breton Woods designed the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and the British loan and British diplomacy as a means of absorbing the British Empire and later the rest of the European former empires into the United States sphere of influence. So the the rules-based order that the United States uh created were rules that favored the United States and the origins of this to really understand the the the split in the kind of world that the the western uh industrial economies have relative to the 85% of the world majority. This goes back really two centuries to the very takeoff of industrial capitalism in Britain, France, Germany and later the United States. And I think in many ways you can say that this the takeoff of industrial capitalism was revolutionary for the countries that were industrializing. And it was revolutionary because the basic principle of industrial capitalism was to lower the cost of production so that industrialists in Britain and other countries could underell competitors abroad. And how do you un how did you underell them? Well, there were three ways. Uh the first way was to get rid of the land the uh the the carryover from feudalism, the landed aristocracy that controlled parliaments with the aim of increasing their land rents and with their land rents the price of food. And the industrialists uh by 1815 led by David Ricardo uh the banker said, "Well, Britain cannot compete with other countries if we have to uh pay our wage labor so much that it pays exorbitant agricultural rents to the landlord class, which had imposed the coin laws, the agricultural tariffs in 1815 to block foreign imports. Ricardo said the the first precondition of of having an industrial country overtake it and uh out compete its competitors is to minimize the cost of living for the labor that it employs. And that means we need free trade in grain and food and raw materials so we can import them from abroad. And that entails freeing the economy from economic rent. Rent is the increase in price, the excess of price over the actual cost value. And uh Ricardo and the whole school of classical political economy aimed at re at keeping prices in the economy in line with the actual cost of production and getting rid of all of the special privileges. The first privileges was that of land rent as I mentioned. The second privilege were monopoly privileges. From the 14th to the uh 18th century, uh Europe's kings had uh tried had needed to uh increase taxes to pay their bankers to lend them the money to go to war with each other. And the uh parliaments of Britain and other countries obviously opposed paying taxes especially uh during the crusades when they opposed the kings of England imposing taxes to pay the bankers to fight wars on behalf of uh of Rome in in its sort of interessine fights with country Germany and countries that didn't accept Roman domination. So the uh the bankers helped the kings in the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries will organize trade monopolies. You don't need parliamentary approval to make a trade monopoly and uh that will yield money and you the king is a recipient of these monopolies can pay us the bankers. So the industrial capitalists of England said we have we have to get rid of these monopolies. Let's have a free market free of economic rent, free from land rent, free from monopoly rent. And the third thing they needed was we have to uh take the financial class in general. Uh we have to bring it into the industrial capitalist order. We want the role of bankers should be to make productive loans to finance capital formation. and banks in England and other countries had not been lending to finance industrial capital formation. They they they didn't lend to uh the inventors of the steam engine or uh James Watt I think had to take out mortgage the land to borrow to get uh money to invest in his uh innovations. So uh the these three forms uh land rent, monopoly rent and interest which is a form of monopoly rent had to be freed and that was really the task of classical economics in the 19th century was to create that uh uh streamlined market free of all the costs that were not really costs of production but were costs of the privileges inherited from the medieval period. Well, things were very different in the rest of the world. uh England uh took 30 years to get rid of the corn laws uh which it did in 1846 and that uh and committed Britain to free trade with other countries and the British uh strategists and diplomats went to other countries and said we'll give you access to the British market. uh you can buy your manufacturers from Britain much cheaper than you can make them yourself. We'll buy raw materials from you, your food, your minerals, uh right others. Uh and it'll be a happy exchange. Well, that they convinced uh America, at least the southern states of America, not the northern states, and they convinced most of the world to uh agree to this specialization of production between the industrial capitalist countries on the one hand and the raw materials producers host economies on the other. Well, what happened was that the uh industrial uh countries ran trade surpluses, went far ahead. They they bought lowpriced uh raw materials. They worked them up into manufacturers and they sold them at a profit and together they the European countries and later the United States had a monopoly in industrial products. Well, the problem is that the rest of the uh world producing raw materials ran trade deficits. And to uh make matters even worse, beginning in the 1820s, the uh newly uh independent former colonies from Haiti uh in the Caribbean, Mexico, Brazil, and then the Ottoman colonies, Greece, uh Egypt, and Tunisia all uh won their independence, but they had to borrow money from creditors in order to remake the economy. and to begin to develop their own industry and their self-sufficiency. Well, almost immediately every country that borrowed defaulted and by the end of the 19th century the uh the debts had uh grown and the defaults had mounted up so that the creditor countries were uh able to appoint central banks or national monetary commissions to manage the fiscal policy of these countries that had won their development. And of course in the colonies you had uh uh Britain and Germany and France, the colonizing powers uh running things and the uh the uh industrial countries used their trade surpluses to invest in the raw materials producers and they they bought uh invested in railroads and communications. They uh they bought out public infrastructure monopolies. They especially bought land and plantations and natural resource rights, forests, minerals for themselves. And the result is that all of these rent yielding resources that the classical economist said should be the natural tax base were not the tax base. They were they were the equivalent of feudalism uh as a burden to the raw materials exporters and in the sense that here you had uh the governments and the domestic economy having to pay heavy rent or uh uh land rent, natural resource rent which is a kind of land rent, monopoly rent and financial debt service all to the creditor countries. So the the fight against that that had been against feudalism in Britain and France and Germany for the rest of the world for the global majority was a fight against foreign rantier interests not only their own rontier interests and uh this uh created a kind of dual economy as it came to be called. And uh by the 1950s for instance these uh Latin America, Africa uh much of Asia were called developing countries but they were not developing in the way that the European industrial nations developed. They were not developing free of economic rent but as subject to economic rent and their their governments uh did not have enough domestic acts returns to be able to make the public infrastructure spending and subsidy of industry that was absolutely critical to Britain, France and Germany and the United States that had a mixed economy because in these industrial countries industrial capitalism was evolving into industrial socialism. It was a mixed economy in all of these countries because the uh industrial class said well uh apart from feeding our wage earners at uh lowerpriced food that we import uh we're going to minimize their cost of living by providing basic needs, basic services uh education, health care, transportation, natural monopolies at minimum cost prices or at subsidized prices or even freely for education so that we're going to make our European economies and later the US economy the lowest cost economies in the world so that we can out compete any potential competition from the uh North America, South America, the global south basically and that was a situation that ex existed you know right through World War II. Well, during World War II, many of these raw materials exporters actually had accumulated large amounts of their own foreign reserves by selling uh minerals and oil and other uh inputs to the the fighters in in World War II. And they emerged in 1945 with in a very strong position. Well, at that point uh the the United States imposed its IMF rules and the World Bank rules and this the these claimed to have a doctrine of economic development that would help these countries develop. It actually prevented them from developing. And so instead of being developing countries, they were warped into dependency countries, not developing countries, but host economies in the sense of host to you could even call it a parasite. And uh the World Bank for instance would make loans uh to uh global south countries not for their own food production to make themselves supply their own food so they didn't have to import it but only to export plantation crops and to pick up all of the infrastructure costs, the port costs and the transportation to uh to export uh their raw materials. They they fought against land reform and any attempt to produce food that would have rivaled and the market and displaced American farmers and farm exports. And the same thing happened after uh the common market was formed with its common agricultural policy which uh also had very heavy government supports, price supports, suspension of free trade in order to support uh a farm uh in investment that vastly increased European farm productivity just as President Roosevelt's agricultural adjustment act in the United States in the 1930s increased American agricultural productivity by being very protectionist. None of nothing like this occurred in uh countries that were clients of the World Bank. Well, pretty soon these countries uh lapsed back into the condition that they'd been in since the 19th century. They ran uh trade deficits. They had to borrow money. That meant they ran into debt. And at that point the international monetary fund came in and uh it said the only way you can get rich is by impoverishing yourself. Uh this is a theory that David Ricardo had developed uh the spokesman of bank bankers for the bullion committee in 1809 1810 in Britain. They they said well uh why don't you do get rich in the way that Britain and Europe got rich lower the wage cost. But they didn't lower the wage cost by lower the cost of living. They lowered it by uh preventing labor unions, by just lowering wages and uh uh not uh providing any of the social support for wages that Europe had and uh uh basically imposing austerity programs uh that had one purpose to prevent governments from having the money to invest in subsidizing their industry and agriculture to be independent. of the European countries. So basically these were anti-development corporations uh inst uh non uh institutions uh the world bank published a report under McNamera partners in development but it was really partners in dependency partners in underdevelopment because it was all based on uh the diametric opposite principles of classical economics and uh the way that the Europe European countries had developed by raising living standards. Uh the World Bank and the IMF aimed at lowering living standards, claiming that this would be more uh more make them more competitive. But this ignored the fact that the American economists pointed out that high-wage labor was so much more productive than low-wage oper labor that they uh it paid for itself. So you had uh western uh European and North American labor, high productivity supported by heavy government subsidy and uh uh provision of basic needs and uh uh unproductive labor that did not have any government or social support in the uh global south countries and that was that's the problem that has led to uh today's problem which uh the crisis which is now this year uh come to a head and it's come to a head uh for two reasons. The uh the most obvious reason is uh the tariff policy that's imposed by Donald Trump. uh the uh pre prevents other countries especially the global south countries from earning the money uh the dollars to pay their debts by exporting to the United States market. Now if their debts are denominated in dollars and the only way they can earn dollars is by exporting to the US or Europe and they're blocked from doing this how can they pay? The only way for the last 50 years they've been able to pay is by being forced to sew off and privatize even more of their natural resources, their mineral rights, sew off their monopolies, pu essentially thatchurize their economy and uh thatchurizing their economy has been just as devastating to the global south countries as it was to Britain. that and that's the crisis. Uh the the second crisis is the fact that for the first time the global south countries and Asia and the BRICS countries as a whole have an alternative to avoid the dependency prep that they've been caught in since 1945 and that's largely because of China. uh ever since the band conference in 1955 in Indonesia, countries uh the non-aligned countries got together and said we've got to have an alternative to the US and European designed economic order that is not in our interest. But they couldn't go it alone. They were just individual and the United States and Britain and Europe were able to divide and conquer them to regime change to uh basically overthrow governments that were not USfriendly. And uh the result was a uh this dual economy structure that you have. Well, uh, they're they're stuck with thatchurized economies, with not being able to have the fiscal resources that Europe developed with. They don't have they don't have sovereignty to impose their own rent tax on land, natural resources, and to create their own monetary systems that would finance their own industry. China did that, but it took a revolution in uh 1945 under Mao. Uh just as in Russia, it took a revolution that got rid of the landlord class and the financial class. Uh and the question is how are the BRICS countries going to emulate the Chinese industrial capitalist model or in uh the industrial socialist model with Chinese characteristics uh that basically are Chinese the Chinese characteristics are those of Adam Smith, John Stewart Mill, Marx the whole classical economic school that developed the whole idea of freeing industrial economies from economic rent, from special privilege and making them uh uh efficient industrial economies. That's that's the crisis. And uh the fact that these countries are now uh able to have an alternative model is what the Americans claim is a clash in civilization. And it's really a a it's not a class a clash of civilization. It's a fight against the attempt by the global south and bricks and global majority to follow the same path of civilization that industrial capitalism began to develop in the 19th century and that the classical economic ideology was all about. If we relate this back to the statement by Marco Rubio that the post-war global order is now used against us. Is this then a reference to the uh rentier system? Um the idea that uh uh the yeah the the currency technologies, banking system, all these uh finances, all these things offered by the United States which it extracts rent from. In other words, uh uh money without contributing to the productive process. Is this um yeah the eliminating America in this role is this what Rubio is referring to when he says that the system is being uh used against us or is it just uh the general trade rules or how how can we interpret uh uh yeah the statement of Rubio >> well it's not the system that's changed it's the United States and the European economies that have changed what began as industrial Capitalism under uh the classical economics of freeing economies from rent uh didn't really win the fight by the uh 20th century. The Rontier interests fought back and you had a replacement of classical value, price and rent theory with an idea that well price equals value. Uh there's no such thing as economic rent. Everybody earns uh whatever they can get whether it's landlords earn uh all the rent they can take the banks earn whatever they charge including late fees all of these are counted in GDP today if you look at the GDP of America and uh Europe you have most of it being rantier charges monopoly rents but especially uh interest charges financial charges is real estate land rent for uh banks have lent more and more credit to uh relative to the price of uh the uh buyer's own mortgage uh more and more of the housing costs in America and Europe are paid uh to the bank. So there's still economic rent in the US and the European economies, but the recipients are no longer the feudal landlord class. They're the banking class. And you've had the bank class uh become the main ronier, not the landlords and not the monopolists, but the banking class has been the mother of monopoly, the mother of trusts, organizing them and then lending buyers and organizers of trusts and corporate takeovers the money to uh to create monopolies and pay out the monopoly rents as interest. So uh what began is industrial capitalism that made the United States and the European economies so wealthy and so productive has ended up being parasetized by turning into finance capitalism. That's the central thesis of almost all of the books and all of the articles uh that that I've read. And so it's the United States that has lost its industrial power by deciding we're going to de-industrialize. We're going to essentially uh put the class war back in business under uh President Clinton in the 1990s by uh let's shift our in uh our industrial production out of the United States to the foreign affiliates of multinational corporations. Let's uh let foreign labor w do the work and then uh that will uh that will prevent American labor from unionizing and raising its wages because we're replacing it with immigrant uh labor or with with Mexican and Canadian uh labor at first and then with uh Chinese and other foreign labor. So the United States took a decision to literally de-industrialize and this de-industrialization it has become financialization as well. So you've replaced an industrial economy with a bank centered wall street centered financial economy that whose central planning is shifted from governments to the financial centers in New York, London, Paris, Frankfurt uh Tokyo uh and the uh economic development of the uh the 15% uh global garden uh and its allies basically have uh have stopped developing and have be have sort of lapsed into the same kind of rontier economy that the whole fight to create industrial power in the 19th century was fought against. Well, that that's led the United States all of a sudden to find well, we can't afford to uh create our own uh industrial self-sufficiency anymore. So uh how are we going to compete? Well, President Trump, uh says there are two ways we can compete. We can either force other countries to pay his tribute by creating an uh empire uh or we can make monopoly rent uh and financial rent. We can make monopoly rent by monopolizing uh the new technology in uh information technology, computer chip technology and especially military technology. We'll tell Europe increase your military spending from 1 and a.5% of GDP to 5% but you have to buy all your military goods from the United States. uh and that will provide that will help us balance our international trade and uh finance our budget deficit uh at the same time. uh and you you also have to uh remain in the dollar system so that uh whatever surplus that foreign countries are able to save out of their trade surplus or investment surplus or domestic earnings all their monetary savings have to be invested in US treasury securities or other US securities in the dollar area and so the wealth and accumulation of all the world is to be sent to the United States. And Trump says he's going to impose 100% maybe 500% tariffs on countries that try to uh use their uh income and and their uh their trade surpluses and their tax surpluses to develop their own economy rather than subsidize the United States economy. So this is a war of the United States not only against the global majority but especially against its own allies in uh Europe uh and also in Japan and North Korea. As you've just seen America's moves against Japan to end its uh ability to sell its automobiles in the United States. Same thing with Korea to inability to sell their industrial products here. It's a declaration of economic war against these uh other countries and uh the U US diplomacy has sort of fixed the outcome by its political interference and uh regime change pressure and the uh non-government organizations that have provided a huge source of funding to promote individuals opportunists as politicians. s or industrial leaders who are favorable to the United States and owe their loyalty really to the United States uh or United States companies like I suppose you'd say merits uh in Germany. So you have uh European political leaders supporting policies that add to the United States domination of Europe while the voters of these European countries do not support this. The voters of Germany, France, other countries are voting against spending their money on war in Ukraine, against fighting against Russia. They want to uh be able to buy in the cheapest market, just like England wanted to buy in the cheapest market back in 1815. But they're blocked. Instead of buying inexpensive Russian oil and gas, they're supposed to buy American liqufied natural gas at four or five times the price as you and I have spoken about before. So the the Europe has been turned into a dependency and the United States is trying to achieve that same hedgeimonyy over global over uh the bricks and global south countries. Well, the problem is that the bricks and global south countries themselves not only have governments that are very largely supported by the United States, for instance, the African uh representatives to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are uh thoroughly neoliberal. Uh so they their their their managerial class has been educated in the United States or Britain in neoliberal thatcherite or uh similar US laws. They're not even familiar with the policy debates that underlay the emergence of industrial capitalism that made Europe so successful originally. So they don't have a model. The only model that they have is that of China which independently has reinvented the wheel. The same wheel that the Adam Smith and John Stewart Melon the British economists and uh the other classical economists developed of a mixed economy where the government uh is in control of its own money creation and the allocation of money. So you will have for instance China doing what any country that's trying to develop and being competitive should do. you uh you create money and credit to finance tangible capital formation not only private capital formation and innovation but basic infrastructure like highspeed railways port development or the belt and road initiative that China is trying to make in order to create a structure of international trade investment that will make uh Asia independent of the United states and uh pre Russia's president Putin had said this is really what the fight is all about. It's uh the fight is to make other countries sovereign nations in charge of their own fiscal policy and investment policy and government policy. But they can't be independent unless they tax away the resource rent from their own. that is now foreignowned uh companies there produced by oil, raw materials production, mineral production, forests. It taxs away uh essentially nationalize the monopolies and make them public monopolies, not foreignowned rontier monopolies. They have to detenti rent their economy. That's uh that's their policy. Well, they don't really have to nationalize these uh foreignowned oil and mineral companies. They simply have to tax the economic rent. And as sovereign countries, they should be able to tax the economic rent. But this is treated as a civilizational conflict. It's an attack on Western civilization and democracy itself. or actually it's an expression of democracy, an expression of their own uh domestic national sovereignty. So this is the fight they have, but their own uh ruling class, their own uh political class and their the wealthiest class that they have are themselves rantier and are part of the Rontier economy. uh a huge amount of Argentinas and Brazil's foreign debt is owned by Argentinians and Brazilians because they know that they're the upper classes and they know that the government is going to pay the dollar debt to themselves and not default on it. So uh you you have uh you have a a kind a class conflict within the bricks countries themselves uh very similar but with uh key differences to the class conflict between labor and capital in the west. That's uh that's a complicating fact uh factor in all this. And uh the question is how are you going to get the BRICS countries and other countries to pursue the same kind of economic reform that China had has done so efficiently without having an actual revolution because the United States has said if you try to make a reform, we're going to do to you what we did to Venezuela, what we did to Iran, what we did to Libya. we're going what we did to Chile, we're going to overthrow you. We don't want a reform. We're trying to keep Western uh power in control. And uh President Putin had gave another speech just a week ago saying, you know, all along we thought since the 1990s that uh the uh anti-Russian feeling that uh Europe and the United States had really was ideological. It was a fight between uh capitalism and and the Soviet ideology. And it turns out that uh certainly that was an element, but they really were just anti-Russian. They wanted to conquer us. They wanted to break us up into five different countries or six countries and uh divide and conquer us and make us their colonies. that it really is all about an attempt by the United States and Europe to control the world just as under industrial capitalism they tried to control the world by industrial power and productivity and controlling uh the rontier surpluses of financial surpluses and rent surpluses of uh raw materials exporters that it turns out to be just a raw power grab. And that's what it's turned into today. >> So you have then the split between the more financialized economies of the west versus the more aspiring at least uh industrial capitalist economies of bricks. Uh so I guess what what frustrates me with Europe a lot is the the reluctance to accept that they've gone from being the subject to the object that uh somehow yeah reluctance to see that the Europeans are the one now being cannibalized by their American partners because uh I think the political leadership sees the future of Europe its greatness or relevance to be tied up with this transatlantic partnership. while at the same time there's some recognition that uh yeah that the yeah that they're being cannibalized by the Americans. So you end up with politicians such as Macron of France who who pivots back and forth between you know we we can't allow ourselves to be vassels of America and the next day it's we have to have solidarity with the US in order to preserve the west. So it's very they want to be in the political west but they very uncomfortable or reject the the the acknowledgement that they are now um in uh become an object effectively. But what what can bricks do now though in terms of uh providing an alternative because the monopolistic system you present with um as the option of the United States it doesn't seem like a very stable or even sustainable option. It uh seems very extractive uh disruptive chaotic and yeah doomed for failure down the road. So what what would be yeah a more well what in your opinion should B bricks be striving for then? >> Well uh let me talk about Europe first. Uh I'll be people like Micron and his counterparts in England Starmer and uh uh and Germany merits uh they're demagogues. They see on the one hand that the population of Europe wants prosperity. They don't want the uh budget to be limited in money creation and running a deficit. They want the government to run deficits to spend on social spending especially to support living standards or at least to prevent the disaster of living standards that have caused by breaking uh trade with uh energy trade with with Russia. So what the voters want is one thing, but the leaders are not responsive to the voters. They're just like Donald Trump here. They are uh they're serving the basically their American sponsors. Uh just and the problem is I guess for Europe the whole way in which the European Union is structured to guarantee failure. The European Union is run by NATO. It's uh the head its foreign policy heads are military hawks whose only interest is uh basically willing to impoverish the European economies in order to uh fight Russia and try to train it in this mythical hope that somehow if they drain Russia enough, Russia will uh be unable to fight the war uh against in Ukraine, against Europe and America. any longer and there will be a regime change. The Europeans and Americans can come up in and carve up Russia as they began to do under Yeltson in the 1990s. they uh eur uh European voters do not have a role to play in European politics under uh a condition where Europe is part of NATO NATO and where it's uh countries are prevented from doing what any sovereign country should do creating its own money to fund its own spending to subsidize its industry and rising living standards. uh it's uh the Europe the European Union's monetary policy was created to prevent running a budget deficit uh in a Keynesian type uh economic stimulus. So Europe Europe is and as long as European policy is run from a basement office in the Pentagon saying well uh you you have to bankrupt your industry uh by uh not importing Russ Russian energy anymore. Yeah, you can move your industrial companies to America, maybe bring your skilled labor here, too. Uh but you're going to have to sacrifice uh in order to defend democracy. democracy like uh Zalinski is imposed in Ukraine, the American model of democracy. Uh I mean this is a travesty. Uh and uh you uh this blocks Europe from working from saying well we really were not going to be uh part of an island off uh the the coast of Rhode Island. We're going to be part of Asia. That's our natural uh trade partner. You know, we were the whole German prosperity came from an integration of trade and investment uh with Russia. They'll have to go back to uh unifying with the rest of Asia and being just another country of equals. But they say we don't want to be equals. We want to dominate. If if we can't control another economy that we trade with, we feel insecure. We feel threatened. And if America cannot control these economies, uh we feel the threat because we're uh we're dependent on the United States. Europe will have to realize that its economic enemy is uh not Russia and China, but the China and the rest of Asia are the most rapidly growing area economies in the world. So, who is Europe to look for for its uh long-term trade and investment development? With a shrinking economy in the United States or a growing economy in East Asia, Europe, unanimous leaders say, "We're with the shrinking economy. We're going to lower our living standards just as rapidly as American living standards are being lowered. Uh, and we're going to impose austerity because that's where our loyalty lies. What can the voters of Europe do against that given the way in which the European Union's politics are organized? Well, the same thing uh problem occurs in the BRICS countries. Uh I'm sure the BRICS voters would love to say why can't our country in Africa or uh South Asia or uh Latin America, why can't we follow the same policy of China? Why can't we uh throw we throw off what for us is the equivalent of European feudalism? We have to say that this whole two centuries of warped development making us uh subsidiary dependencies of the industrial creditor nations has not worked out. Our sovereignty is to go to uh work with each other. We have to make a clean slate. Uh that the debts cannot be paid unless we forego all of our investment in growth. Is who who are we going to put first? Are we going to put the foreign bond holders first as a claim on our tax revenues? Or are we going to put our own economic growth first and our own domestic investment in achieving economic self-sufficiency and rising living standards first? Well, unanimously the British countries say, "Uh, forget living standards. We're going to follow the IMF. We're going to impose austerity because we in the ruling class, the client oligarchy, are doing very well ourselves. We're really an extension of the US finance capitalist uh economy. So, this is the ruling class of Argentina, much of Brazil under Bolsinaro. That's what the whole fight uh in Brazil is all about. This is this is the whole problem. There's you not only need a revolution by the BRICS countries and global majority countries uh to in terms of their philosophy of economics development to adopt classical economics and its uh freeing economies from rent. You need a political revolution against its own client oligarchies that have been put in place by this dependency system that's been imposed over the last two centuries often by force and violence. Well, the I I fear that well almost a law of nature is though the we can say a political elite which is no longer uh delivering on the on the on the desires of its public but if they don't there will always be this political upheaval. I think so far the political class has simply dismissed all reactions to its uh failure to pursue basic national interest as being populists and populists are illegitimate and should be countered almost in in any possible way. Now the this only works for so long though because uh if if they if they do not respond to national interest uh there will be some massive political instability or upheaval coming. But but the responding to national interest depends on how the distribution of power is organized and in a multipolar system that is the actual realities of uh the distribution of power not being concentrated in the United States anymore. Uh the policies have to reflect this in some way. It seems this uh as you say the the political elites in Europe only pursuing as actually doing America's bidding uh while it's uh yeah national interests are ignored. is I'm wondering how long this can actually go on and uh uh if there will be some um pursuit of if not joining bricks some some similar alternative at least uh because I think the Europeans while the Americans they at least think what you will about Trump and is a terrible solutions to this uh uh well trying to pursue a new system. At least he recognizes though that the post World War II era is over. I think the Europeans are still in denial if they can only do enough self-sacrifice, enough war, uh enough bootlegging of Trump, then somehow they can bring back this or restore this era. I think uh the this is what the Americans, the Chinese, Russians all have in common. And I think they realized that this era is over and now of course split interest. Uh do you have any final thoughts on this uh I would say very important uh topic of a of it seems as if we have yeah an era over the past 80 years uh economic system is coming to an end and there's no real consensus and even among the different alternatives it doesn't seem to be the conceptual clarity you want you I would like to see in for example bricks to have a sustainable alternative and uh even less so with uh with the Trump administration. >> Well, what you've described, Glenn, is the materialist approach to history and that history believes that countries are going to do what ultimately is in their natural interest. There's a kind of survival of the fittest and the fittest ultimately are going to work out. But that's not what's happened in a lot of history. uh the it's not the fittest survived and the materialist approach to history uh has left out the reasons why the uh the race is not always to the swift as the Bible uh puts it. And so we really don't know what's going to happen today. Uh for uh Germany, for instance, it's not just that the post-war era is over. World War II is not over. It's still on. Mertz says, "We want to make the German army as strong, the dominant army, as it just was before." The dominant army, he means it's only one army, the the Verach, the Nazi army. He you're having a revival of what really is Nazism uh in in Germany. It's like all of a sudden we're going back to uh the the World War II period. We're having a dictatorship in France where despite all of the uh demonstrators uh the yellow vests and the demonstrations throughout France hasn't been able to get rid of Macron. You have a whole uh obsolescence of the political constitutions uh and the politics that have led to uh Starmer in Britain just following Tony Blair as part of the uh super Thatcherite uh development. None of this is in the national interest of these countries. They're not what the voters want. But the political system has become dissociated from what the voters want. uh it may be that the uh only catalyst for this is not going to be uh in Europe but it's going to be in other countries that uh especially former present allies of the United States such as Japan, South Korea uh that decide well now that we can't run trade surpluses with the United States anymore now that it's doing to us in Japan what it did with a plaza at Louver Accords in the 1980s. Now we maybe we've got to make a rashon with China. I think as Western Europe sees other Asian countries uh joining China uh and one after another and uh by China the it's its overall development plan belt and road and overall trading and investment area. Uh Europe is is going to see they're pulling further and further ahead of us. They've list left us behind. Do we re how long can we agree to be left behind? And what can we do to make a change? Well, the question is, can this be done without a revolution? I don't know. Uh how do you make will it be a peaceful revolution? Uh how do you change a constitution that has left Europe and uh client oligarchies in this position? It's as much a political question as it is an economic question. So while we talk in terms of economic selfdetermination, how do you deal with the fact that there's this political distortion of what you and I would think is the natural materialist logic of history. >> Well, on those great final words, uh we can wrap it up. That's a I I I like that uh possibility at least though that uh because I do see some optimistic uh signs coming out coming out of East Asia both from South Korea and Japan. It looks as if they yeah they they also come to realize that as the post World War II era or system is coming to an end that the American role will change fundamentally in terms of also cannibalizing allies. uh something by the way also evident in the rhetoric towards Taiwan. So as this is happening if they make this shift uh yeah it remains to be seen if the Europeans will still I yeah throw themselves on the sword in this way but uh I don't know I'm I'm very disillusioned by the Europeans at the moment so I remain pessimistic but at least that's a source of optimism though. >> Yes. Yeah. optimism. Yes, there will be a revolution. >> Well, Professor Hudson, thank you as always. It's always fascinating to speak with you. So, thanks again. >> Well, thank you, Glenn.