Welcome back to the program. We are joined again by our good friend, Professor Michael Hudson to discuss uh neoliberal economics uh its unavoidable end and uh what comes uh thereafter. So uh welcome back to the program. >> Good to be back Glenn. So, uh, is this, I guess, the end of, uh, the economic model we've seen, I guess, at least since the 1980s, or to maybe take a step back, uh, how would you define neoliberal economics and, uh, uh, why do you think it may have reached its unavoidable terminal stage? I think I can't talk about neoliberal economics without contrasting it to the original liberal economics which was classical political economy and the whole theory of value price and rent from the physiocrats through Adam Smith, John Stewart Mill, Marx and the whole rest of the 19th century. The whole idea of economic policy driving increase in output more efficiently and measuring economic progress was a based on value and price theory. And what Ricardo called the labor theory of value was really the price theory of rent. Rent uh prices were the excess of the the market price o over value. Uh rent was the the excess of of u price. In other words, commodities had a cost of production. How did the market price ever become more than the cost of production? Well, land rent was the main reason and the whole fight of the early 19th century politically was to free industrial capitalism from the legacy of feudalism above all in the form of a uh landlord class, a hereditary landlord class wanting uh land rent. and the whole fight of that led to David Ricardo's refinement of Adam Smith's theories and the physiocratic theories of value was the fight over tariffs that occurred in the last uh the end of the Napoleonic wars. what I'm talking about may seem to be a distraction but you uh it's the key to understand where neoliberal economics and its GDP accounting its idea of national income accounting all was part of a counterrevolution against the concept of free markets that Adam Smith Mill Marx and the whole 19th century had the problem after the Napoleonic wars because the Napoleonic blockade of uh trade with uh Britain ended and uh all of a sudden uh Britain that had become dependent on domestic food production during the wars uh found lowpriced food imports coming. The landlords uh protested. They said this means we're getting less rents. you have to impose tariffs to block imports so that uh we are going to be able to pro uh keep our land rent high. Uh and Ricardo and his followers they were called Ricardian socialists said are we going to sacrifice the whole economy just so that landlords are going to be able to uh make increased rent? The industrialists said we have have hopes of making Britain the workshop of the world. In order to become the workshop of the world, we have to create our industrial manufacturers at a lower price than abroad. In order to have industrial capitalism rise to uh dominate rivals, we're in a race to cut costs uh to the to basically the minimum. And if we have to pay our employees a high enough wage to cover artificially high food prices to produce land rents for the landlords, then we're not going to be able to compete with industries in the United States and other countries that are have lower uh cost uh food production and don't have to pay their uh labor anywhere near as much. So the whole dynamic of industrial capitalism from its takeoff in the late 18th century was to uh rationalize economies to get rid of unnecessary costs of production. And John Stewart Mill summarized this in saying land rent and the increasing price of land is is what landlords make in their sleep. It's not a product. It's what we call today a transfer payment. And uh if we have to support a uh economic rontier class, then we're not going to be able to become a competitive industrial economy. So in using this concept of a free market as a market free from economic rent, free from uh any kind of unearned income that is not a product but is simply a privilege. The privilege of landlords to own land and to be able to use their wealth to control parliaments to support uh their rents and hence food prices. the privileges of monopolies to increase the price of their products without actually reflecting increasing costs. The contrast between the market price that the populations had to pay for their products and the actual production was supposed to be minimized by industrial capitalism in order to make it more efficient. and being more efficient uh the the rontier free economies would become the dominant industrial economies. That was the whole uh guiding principle of classical economics as developed in Britain and later by France, Germany uh and uh by the United States. you wanted to uh tax land away landlords uh and the land instead of taxing labor and industry. And the whole critique of the physiocrats, the critique of Adam Smith was that uh the landlords were a uh basically parasitic class that got income without producing anything. And uh the idea was uh to uh not let the landlord's control of parliament shift the tax burden onto labor through excise taxes or industry uh through profit taxes, income taxes that didn't distinguish between earned income and unearned income. the whole idea of productive labor, productive spending, productive investment. Productive investment was investment that created a product. Uh and it wasn't investment that created a opportunity for charging rent and unearned income on this product. So value theory became the whole essence of classical economics and that led to parliamentary reform because the Ricardians uh took uh it f took 30 years for the industrialists in Britain to uh join with the uh population to extend the vote to labor so that they would vote against the landlord interest and repeal the corn laws. uh 30 years later in 1846 and then go on to u try to shift the tax off labor and industry onto land. By 1909 and 1910, the House of Commons in Britain actually passed a land tax and uh it was vetoed by the House of Lords and that created a uh constitutional crisis that lasted from 1909 to 190. And the result was that uh the British constitution passed a rule that the House of Lords dominated by the landed interest could never again uh uh veto a revenue act passed by the House of Commons. That was the whole fight of classical economics to uh to say we want to support productive income that is actually a necessary cost to production. We don't want to uh untax and promote uh rent seeking that has not a cost to production but is a charge like a tax on the rest of the economy. Well, what happened was by the late 19th century, as you can imagine, the landlords fought back against this. Uh they tried to uh argue against this and increasingly they were supported by the banking system and because the bankers u found that as they by getting rid of the hereditary landed aristocracy that owned the land in Britain, you'd uh democratized uh land rent and housing and commercial real estate. Anybody uh since the early late 19th century and can buy their own house, anybody can buy their own commercial building. It's in that sense it's a a a free market. But in order to uh buy a a home, pe uh new buyers have to go into debt because they don't have enough money to pay the lump sum for a property. They take out a mortgage and the result is that the what used to what the classical economics Adam Smith, John Stewart Mill, the first line of the communist manifesto, the whole 19th century wanted to tax lender. the the bankers said, "Well, if we can prevent this land from being taxed, it'll be available to be paid as interest to us." and uh they joined with the uh with the real estate sector and the monopoly sector and the oil and gas industries in having creating an alternative to the uh liberal economics of uh classical economics. Thorstein called this neocclassicism uh neocclassical and he didn't mean that it was a new form of classical economics. It was the antithesis. And what he meant by that was that uh this counter ideological counterreaction against the classical concept of free markets, a market free from economic rent was turned into the opposite. A market free for rent seeking for uh rent to be untacked and unregulated. uh for monopolies not to be subject to antirust and anti- monopoly regulation and for banks to uh essentially be free to lobby to try to get as much of the uh rising price of land as a result of rising prosperity, public improvements, the growth of population uh into their own hands because bankers knew that whatever was not paid to the tax collector was avail available to pay to the bankers. And if you're going to buy a house, uh buyers bid against each other. And the winning buyer is the person who can raise the biggest mortgage from the bank. And so the price of housing, real estate, uh is worth whatever a bank will lend against it. So you uh in the democratization of land ownership and of economic rent went hand in hand with the financialization and privatization of this rent not with its socialization as the uh classical economists wanted. Well, this may seem a uh diversion, but uh the victory of the anti-classists uh claiming that there was no such thing as economic rent, that everybody's income was productive, that the landlord was productive in providing the service of managing the property and deciding who are you going to rent to. the uh banker was productive in deciding who's going to be creditw worthy and uh a sound uh customer. Uh even the monopouist was productive in rationalizing markets. So all of a sudden the class of rent recipients land rent, natural resource rent, monopoly rent, interest and financial charges as rent. All of that was deemed uh uh productive, not unproductive. And the result is that in today's national income and product accounts and the GDP accounts, all of the rent seeking by these classes, landlords, monopolists, the financial sector, the oil and gas industry, all of these economic rents are counted as part of the GDP. There's no such thing as unearned income. And the productivity of say a banker is however much money uh he charges for the banking service. And so a few years ago uh I guess back in 2007208 the head of Goldman Sachs the investment uh banking firm in America said that partners and employees of Goldman Sachs were the most productive workers in the United States because they made the most money. And you can look at the national income accounts and all of their income is viewed as a cost of doing business. Well, this is the opposite of classical economics. It said it's it's not a product. It's economic overhead. It's a transfer payment. Well, today for instance, uh a probably almost all of the growth more than all of the growth in US GDP and I think uh much European GDP also uh in addition is not indust industry and agriculture and transportation creating a product. It's this rontier overhead that is not part of the production process but part of the circulation process part of uh the transfer payments that are achieved by the vested interests using their political power uh to uh gain economic benefits of untaxing their economic rents and doing just exactly what had happened under feudalism. transferring the fiscal burden off the landlords, off the monopolists, off the bankers, onto labor and industry. That's exactly why the physiocrat said France and Spain and uh other uh similar countries that are strongly royalist could not industrialize until they changed the tax system. And that uh when Adam Smith traveled to Europe before writing the uh wealth of nations, he was convinced that uh this basic approach was right. and he set about refining a more uh logical theory of value and prices that was refined by Ricardo uh mouths the the the Ricardians uh the Ricardian socialists, the socialists and the Marxists and uh in the United States by uh the uh business schools uh Thorstein, all of the industrial uh promoters that wanted to see their economies industrialized. and become the major industrial nations followed this idea of freeing their economies from the rontier sector. Well, fast forward to today, you have uh just the opposite idea of a of a free market, a market free for the rent seekers. And as a result uh you you have in uh in the United States uh the much of what's counted as gross national product is not a product. Can you say that charging interest produces a product? when uh the the GDP uh one element of it is the census department or the Bureau of Labor Statistics uh goes around to interview households in the United States and they say, "Well, if you own your uh you own your own home, what if you had to rent your what uh the property that you now own, how much will you charge in rent?" because uh you own it and uh we have uh we count as all of the rent that people pay as part of the cost part of the cost of the economy's doing business. Uh so we have to count the value of your uh increased uh rent and the increased price of your uh the home that you have. Well, is this creating a profit when the banks will lend more uh money by uh l increasing the debt income ratio uh so that borrowers can borrow more and more and more money. This is what led to the 2008 real estate crisis. 100% mortgages uh interestonly mortgages uh uh to carry the debt. uh all of this was counted as uh so as if it were not only contributing to GDP but making the economy more prosperous but it it actually didn't because as the opportunities for rent seeking became more remunerative than tangible capital formation and building factories and employing labor to produce more products. uh you had the United States and the European economies de-industrializing uh you had the financial financialization of the corporate sector. You had corporate rating. You had merges and acquisitions. uh you had the a shift in the focus of what is industrial development uh all about in the sense of how do you make a fortune quickest? and the uh corporate uh economy realized that they could make a fortune faster by using the profits that they made on their business to uh for stock buybacks and to pay out as dividends because uh doing the this paying 94% of their profits for the S&P 500 on stock by dividends created did more capital gains in the form of rising stock prices that uh than they ever could have made by investing more and making a profit on actual industrialization. So the whole motivation of turning away from the classical focus on uh the idea of an economy is to create value to uh the neoliberal idea of uh which means the anti- liberal idea the antilass idea of well uh let's focus on uh just making money as if it's all homogenized and there's no distinction between productive and unproductive. of investment. No distinction between making a fortune by uh developing a new product and building factories to produce. And we're taking over an existing factory and carving it up and uh increasing the stock price by stopping investing in long-term uh capital formation, long-term research and development. Let's just use live in the short run and push up the price of our stocks now. then we can use uh the profits we make the capital gains we make labor later. So the uh if if you look at how is wealth accumulated in the United States, you have imagine here's like the GDP and earnings earnings by uh labor, the wages and profits of corporations and on top of that much faster increase in cap in uh the value of stocks, bonds and real estates. the the value of stocks, bonds and real estate increasing each uh year. I should say the price of stocks, bonds and real estate increasing each year is larger than the whole GDP. This is a distortion of the whole concept of what industrial growth is. So let's say what does this mean for today's economic diplomacy and uh the world uh people the uh almost uh all the popular media uh and academic reports contrast the US GDP to uh European GDP to China's GDP as if it was all the same kind of GDP. One GDP is another GDP. The difference is that China has uh been has the country that has most of all followed the same classical policy of industrial capitalism that made Britain, France, Germany and the United States rich. China sort of reinvented the wheel independently of looking at the history of economic thought. uh it figured out let's uh design an economy of engineers and that's because most of the central committee of uh China's communist party are engineers. They're not taken from Wall Street. They're not bankers. They're not financial uh engineers. They're industrial engineers or scientific engineers uh not uh not financialization. And so they they have real product GDP whereas the GDP that the United States and Europe are producing are largely uh anti-product. They're the the sphere rontier uh income which uh has to be paid by labor and capital. That was the whole essence of Ricardian economics, of John Stewart Mill, of socialist economics, of the two volumes that uh uh volumes two and three of Capital that Markx wrote, and the economics taught in American business schools by professors such as Simon Patton and later uh expressed in political terms by Thorstein uh in the United States. So, we're really dealing with two different philosophies of what is economic production and uh economic growth all about. I is it going to be industrial growth of actual product that raises uh living standards and productivity or is it going to be at the expense of labor and capital to create a rontier class at the top of the economic pyramid that uses more and more of its RTA income to cut taxes on itself and to buy control of the political campaign uh process to make sure that it's uh uh its uh fiscal policies untax it, shift the taxes onto industry and endows business schools to teach a neocclassical economic curriculum that denies the concept of economic rent. So you'll have Milton Freriedman saying there is no such thing as a free lunch. But the Rontier economy is all about a free lunch. Getting a monopoly privilege is a free lunch. Making income in your sleep, whether you're a landlord or a banker, is getting a free lunch. That's what makes neoliberalism uh so uh destructive of the industrial economy just as was forecast by Ricardo who wrote a wonderful chapter saying we're headed for economic armageddon if if uh we uh if we do not have free trade if we insist that uh Britain relies entirely on domestic farming for its food. Uh, as the population increases, uh, Ricardo thought you had to move to less and less fertile soils and productivity would decline and you'd have rising food prices. He said economic rent, land rent specifically, is going to absorb all of the economic surplus over and above subsistent standards. There will be no way of making profits at this point because no industrialists can afford to hire labor that has to pay such high prices for food that uh if we uh pay it the high prices that will be transferred to the landlords in the form of higher rents, then we can't possibly compete with other countries with lower costs of food production. uh and uh his followers said or monopoly with uh monopolies or with the financial sector. So there was a whole perception already in 1817 with uh Ricardo's writing on economic rent that anticipated that uh first land rent and other by the end of the 19th century you had the whole balance of the classical economist saying not only rent land rent will uh force up the cost of doing business uh wages and uh industry and agriculture. It'll be monopolies will uh force up the cost of living and doing business. Finance and debt financing and banking is going to increase the cost. We've got to uh move towards the uh basically they everybody called it socialism at that time. It wasn't a bad term. Uh today you have to realize that if uh if uh Adam Smith and John Stewart Miller were writing today, they would be called Marxists. And why would they be called Marxists? Because they talk about value and price. And the the counterrevolution against classical economics has been so intense uh to reject the concept of economic rent that the only uh political group that continued to talk about rent and unearned income and exploitation were the Marxists. But what Markx was doing was simply codifying and perfecting and uh extending the concept of land rent and monopoly rent to the financial sector in volumes two and three of his capital uh and volumes two and three of what was the first history of economic thought Markx's theories of surplus value that was not published until after he died when it was edited by Carl Kowsky but uh Marx placed himself in the classical tradition. So the rejection of classical economics became a rejection of Marxism and it was called Marxism and uh called socialism. But uh the Ricardian socialists they called themselves that uh were not Marxist because Marx wasn't writing yet. Uh it was the the whole idea of socialism was uh natural monopolies should be kept in the public domain as public utilities like uh uh electricity like communications the BBC like education should be a public utility healthc care could be a public utility that wasn't a leftwing policy that was uh the policy of Britain's conservatives led by Benjamin Israeli he said health all is health. All of these ideas that uh in if in order to avoid monopoly rent from uh sectors that are naturally monopolies uh you the the government should provide these monopoly services. And unlike corporate uh private enterprise, the objective of government investment in education, health care, transportation, communication is not to make a profit. It's to minimize the price so that you can subsidize the whole rest of the economy. So that the rest of the economy does not have to pay uh uh an overhead by say u labor wanting to go to college to get an education to get a a better job. Uh you don't want labor to be burdened with uh consumer debt, with education debt, automobile debt, all of and uh high prices for transport privatized privatation. uh privatized uh communication, transportation, uh privatized health care as you have in the United States. So uh in the United States, if you look at the GDP and national income accounts, 18% of US national income is for medical insurance, medical care. Uh how can the United States expect to uh reshore its industrialization when its labor has to pay such enormous costs for health care that no other country has to pay? Uh how are the if you're an industrialist hiring labor here with sort of similar technology that's available to all the other countries, how are you going to compete with an efficiently run economy that is socialized these basic costs and uh that subsidizes the uh uh the costs of living that industrial employers would otherwise have to pay their labor enough uh high enough wages so that they could afford to pay the uh the the the privatized health care, the the uh uh privatized education system and so on. We're dealing with two different economic philosophies there. And so neoliberalism is the opposite, an anti an uh actually a radical revolution against classical economics. And that's one of the reasons why at American universities, there's no longer the history of economic thought being taught as a core course in the doctoral program for economic PhDs. There's not even economic history taught. So that you have a generation of economic students being taught and graduating without any idea that this century two century long ideological fight occurred over the concept of value, price, rent. What is production? What is a free lunch? What is earned income? What is unearned income? What is productive labor versus an investment versus unproductive labor investment? All of these core concepts that guided every successful industrial nation in its takeoff has been rejected. So it's hardly surprising that uh the west has followed a an opposite policy from the original dynamic of industrial capitalism and only uh China's socialism with Chinese characteristics follows the American German uh classical economic industrial capitalism worldview. It's I'm very glad you mentioned the GDP because this uh the way GDP um yeah covers up uh for uh well rising rents and uh monopoly income it's uh it's often ignored and indeed we see GDP as a measurement over time becoming uh yeah less and less reliable. Uh but there is something fascinating though about um as you suggest the ideology of uh uh this whole new neoliberal economics that is uh that is everyone more or less realized that neoliberal economics and unfettered markets often produce this kind of monopolies and economic inequalities. It offers less worker protection. We already know this. We know that this can fuel social problems when you know that the oligarchies uh developed by no limits on rent seekers create the political instability when people have less um vested interest in the status quo political polarization. Uh even less role for democracy. uh again all of these things are known and and but it's still it's uh in this ideological speech we now it's dismissed as you know communism or socialism but this was the language of Alexander Hamilton or Henrik Clay or Fredic list so it is quite extraordinary and but I was after this period of globalization we everyone kind of we have this this idea from the early 90s that this would deliver harmony and uh perpetual growth. Uh however, at the same time, everyone realizes that this unfettered market forces would uh would well create the problems which we have today. Yet, it's quite extraordinary though as academics. We we can't really go to any university across the west where it's uh where we can challenge the whole role of um un of unfettered markets. So, it's it's quite extraordinary. Um but I I I did want to ask though what happens >> wait before I can let me say one thing what you just you use the word market it's as if the market is something universal and objective every market is shaped by laws by the regulatory system you can have a market that has anti- monopoly laws that uh uh antirust laws that prevent monopolies or you can have a market where either there are no laws or where the antirust legislation simply is not enforced. Uh you can have a a market that keeps uh natural monopolies and uh education and healthcare is public utilities or a privatized market. There's no such thing as a market uh itself. And there's uh the word capitalism is used for c for economies all the way I've I've seen people call Mesopotamia in the Babylonian the third millennium capitalist because people made money off capital. The whole idea the distinction between industrial capital and financial capital is different. Uh I want to make one point. Let's say we're we're looking at an economy uh from here on in and you're comparing the you're looking at what is the structure of economic growth of Europe or America or any other economy. GDP is expected to grow maybe very very little 1 to 2% a year but the interest rates are now for long-term interest rates 4% a year. Well, you can imagine how much faster the financial debt overhead grows than the real economy. Well, that's been happening since 1945. It's actually been happening for over a hundred years. And so the uh the accumulation of financial fortunes grows faster than the uh value the cost value of all the factories and machinery and agriculture industry uh agriculture, commerce uh you you you have this financial overhead growing and the financial overhead sector backs the real estate overhead and you you have if you look at land prices, land uh uh prices, land uh uh valuation that's gone much faster than GDP. All of the growth in economic rent is faster than the growth in profits and wages. wages are act uh the cost of living the actual wages in the United States have drifted down and in Germany now you're seeing the whole even the GDP shows that it it's shrinking and yet uh the the interest rates are uh uh rising you're you're seeing a economic polarization that impoverishes the economy because this polarization is not turning income and wealth into the hands of uh producers but into the hands of an economic overhead rontier class. That's why the missing concept in uh in understanding neoliberalism is the absence of the concept of economic rent. Well, I uh yeah well I was curious though if well if this is more or less uh predictable how how we ended up here uh what do you what do you see as happening at the end of the road of this uh neoliberal economic model because as you said it has exhausted itself that is uh it's difficult all the United States for example can't compete in a open or free market against the Chinese economy And uh well the the extent of a concentration of wealth and rent seeking within various western economies has become so extreme that it's well suffocating the possibility of further growth just the even if you have a consumer-driven economy even uh the lack of consumption is causing um some some problems here. But what what is it that follows the neo neoliberal model? Because often you have get these arguments that uh neoliberalism would for example transition into fascism. Or you have this idea that uh um uh well that they would have to well um and it could restart again from scratch, but you would have to have some kind of revolutionary moments to you know more in the not not in the communist way but uh uh but but some kind of collapse to reset cuz traditionally when you have this kind of concentration of wealth uh for example when you have the world wars it has a resetting effect. Um but uh how do you see um what what comes after this? >> Well, I prefer to use the term neoliber uh neo neofudalism to uh fascism because fascism is sort of lost at people don't understand what it was all about. Uh that it was essentially uh financialization taking over economies, the large corporate wealth. It was it was the class war. uh and uh the uh I think when you say neo feudalism you actually look at the how the banking and the uh landowning interests were controlling society uh the result you you quite correctly put this in the international context uh the Trump's policy is and the deep state behind him realize that America is un as long as it continues to follow a neoliberal financialized economy of finance capitalism, not industrial capitalism, it'll fall further and further behind. How is it going to cope? Well, the the first response is just exactly what Trump has done in the last six months. He say let's get let's ex uh exploit foreign countries and make foreign countries provide the United States economy with uh the income and wealth that we're no longer producing here. So you have uh this is why he convinced Vanderlayan and uh the uh uh the European uh Union to u surrender to Trump's demands uh that Europe make huge uh in uh concessions to the United States and be willing to commit economic suicide itself to help the United States. Well, in order to do this, the United States had to put in place a whole 75 years of foreign diplomatic control through the National Endowment of Philos of uh uh democracy of inter of uh interference and meddling in foreign uh European uh political affairs. uh assa assassinating uh socialists such as Aldoro Morrow of Italy when they would not uh they threatened not to support uh US dominance. Uh you have the United States saying well uh let's make uh tell Japan that they have to pay $350 billion protection racket to the United States in order for us not to wreck their economy with tariffs. And uh the United States uh uh then saw that Japan wasn't fighting back. So it went to Korea and said Korea has to spend $350 billion. Well, the Korean president uh and foreign minister said, "We don't have 350 million. We're not as wealthy as Japan." Uh Trump said, "You have to pay us anyway or we will wreck your economy by blocking uh Hyundai and uh automobiles and other exports, and we're going to block your uh uh electronics exports if you don't relocate here." This is the policy. The America is unable to uh strongarm countries that are not its allies into doing this. So America has said well what are allies for? What's the European community for? What are Japan, Korea, Australia, New Zealand for if not to uh do to us? What the British Empire did to India and uh all of the parts of the British Empire? They have to keep all all their savings and uh economic surplus in the financial center. Not uh Britain any longer, but now it's in the United States. Well, the result will be that uh there's going to be a polarization abroad and at some point presumably Europe is going to say, "Do we really want to uh impoverish uh German industry by uh spending four times as much money on uh US liqufied natural gas as we'd have to spend on Russia gas? The fact is we've had to close down." What is Europe going to look like without an an industry that can no longer afford to pay the economic uh uh for to pay the the high prices of depending on the United States? It's very much like Ricardo defined British futures. What if Britain has to depend on their own landlords for higher priced food? Well, what if uh Europe has to depend on uh America for higher priced energy and for monopoly products such as the information technology, shipmaking and all this? Well, the uh the German re reaction by the Christian Democrats uh under Meritz has been maybe military Keynesianism will work mainly if we uh cut back our spending on uh uh education on social spending the cut back the spending on labor cut back the social services cut back the social economy and and reduce everybody's living standards by 10% uh by uh essentially becoming a military econ uh economy, maybe that'll create prosperity. But given the fact that Europe's uh monetary philosophy uh is not as progressive as uh the American philosophy that is just well we can always just create the money to spend into the economy. uh Britain is subject to uh I won't say a balanced budget but almost a balanced budget with the uh constraint of you can't uh run up a debt of more than 5% of the GDP. We'll compare that to the the United States economy and rising up the debt. uh Europe is uh committing is imposing monetary austerity on its economy such as the international monetary fund has been imposing on uh global south countries uh for the last 75 years. It's uh again this is uh monetary and financial suicide uh that is leading to uh economic suicide and again there doesn't seem to be any memory of the fact that there is an alternative. It's as if all Europe has gone saturate and believes there's no alternative. Well, of course, there is an alternative, and China shows there's an alternative, or the American industrial takeoff in the 19th century shows there's an alternative, or Germany's industrial takeoff leading up to World War I uh under Bis from Bismar on uh shows there's an alternative. But this is no longer taught as if all that is socialism. It's as if Bismar was a Marxist. The Americans were Marxist. All of this is called Marxist. And uh uh it's almost like uh uh the a religion treats uh the devil. So it's uh is if it's somehow unthinkable to have an alternative where you actually focus on re reindustrializing the economy by free by doing uh what successful Asian economies did what the successful American economy did and what the successful German and British economy did. They they avoid privatization of monopolies. They've avoid privatization of the land rent. Instead, you financialize them instead of fin uh uh instead of uh socializing them. So you uh if you're going to have an asocial asocialist economic philosophy and social philosophy, you're going to have an anti-industrial philosophy. And uh there has to be a knowledge of uh an economic alternative. That's why I I took this half hour at the beginning to uh explain that there was this whole body of history and of economic thought that used to be common knowledge in everybody's textbook. They all knew what Adam Smith wrote. They knew what John Stewart Mill wrote. And they even knew what Markx and the socialist wrote and uh Thorstein Feblin and uh uh other uh economists describing the laws of motion of industrialization. And now all of that is set aside just for doing statistical analysis of based uh what purports to be empirical analysis but is based on economic categories that are not a map. uh they're a map but not a territory. The economic map that's drawn by uh European economists and governments of GDP and national income and product account is not the territory of the real economy. That's the crisis uh at the intellectual ideological crisis at the re uh at the root of uh European and US stagnation and de-industrialization. >> Well, Professor Hudson, thank you so much. Um it's uh it it does surprise me that a lot of the again all the writings of uh of the industrial uh capitalists has all been reduced almost to ideological slogans and I find the comments on um GDP to be especially important because it's um they they they kind of buy into this themselves whenever they assess the the comparisons between different economies. So for example, the the common slogan uh in Europe because we're at now the fact of war with Russia uh that well the Russians have a GDP the size of Spain and you know we but but but no one then seems to bridge it with well how do we explain that they can uh industrial production outproduce uh all of NATO combined and then some. Uh so no it's a very no it's a it's an excellent point. So uh uh thank you so much for your time. I always appreciate it. >> Well, I discuss these concepts in uh killing the host which is translated into German as their sector. So these the books are published uh in Germany and uh in in English. Uh they're they're available and uh my other books uh the destiny of civilization are all about how what we're in today is an epo of finance capitalism antithetical to industrial capitalism. >> Yeah, I'll uh I'll leave that uh link in the description as well. killing the host, how uh financial parasites and debt bondage destroy the global economy. So it's um yes uh so go in the link and uh yeah read this because uh it's seems to be extremely relevant in these days. So thanks again. >> Well, thanks for giving me an opportunity to make my points.