Hi everyone, Michael Hudson joins us
today, a worldrenowned professor of
economics uh to make sense of what is
happening in the world economy. More
specifically, uh we will address the
extent to which the world um is
returning to economic nationalism or
not. So yeah the topic of today then
will be how um this industrial or
economic nationalism emerge and then
later move on to look at uh to what
extent has returned and uh why whether
or not Trump's policies can be
understood uh in this uh framework and
um well I guess as we know in the
beginning of the 19th century an idea
was put into practice from Alexander
Hamilton to Henry Clay which suggested
that indust industrial ization was
intrinsically linked to political
sovereignty and nation building. So, uh,
Michael Hudson, uh, it's wonderful to
have you on the program again. It's good
to be back, Glenn. I, uh, wanted to
start off by asking
you what what you read into this, uh,
era from the beginning of the 19th
century, uh, in the United States. Do
you do you also look at it as economic
nationalism? And uh what is the history
behind it? Well, Frederick List was not
a nationalist in the sense that we use
the term today. Uh he was visiting the
United States. So who was he going to be
a nationalist for? Nationalism I think
is a policy of of dominance. Uh America
was not in that position in the early
19th century. It wanted to protect
itself from British dominance. Uh
industrial dominance, commercial and
monetary dominance. Uh that was all
based on free trade theory. And this is
what most Americans were taught at the
universities in the United States. Most
universities were created as u religious
schools to train uh preachers uh to to
to train religious people. And economics
was taught in the fourth year of college
as a moral philosophy course. And it was
Adam Smith. It was straight very
angophile and very uh uh free trade. And
the problem was how does the United
States develop its own industry? uh
having already fought in the colonial
era against uh British monetary
domination by uh Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania created their own
currencies uh their own fiat state
currencies in limited amounts in order
to provide uh the means of livelihood so
that the colonists didn't have to rely
on British bankers to uh lend money and
essentially keep the economy deflated.
ated and
uh basically the equivalent of an IMF
austerity plan in the 18th century. So
the United States already had seen the
need to develop its own
self-reliance. Nationalism tends to be
an oppression of other countries. What
the Americans wanted to do was to be
independent and free of dependency on
others. So Friedrich List met Matthew
Kerry, Henry K's father uh in
Philadelphia and he saw that the
discussion centered around the political
campaign of Henry Clay who was the wig
leader uh from the 1920s to the 1940s.
And Henry Clay had promoted something
called the American system, protective
tariffs, uh, and internal improvements,
meaning public utilities uh, financed by
the government, especially in
transportation such as the Eerie Canal
and roads and later the railroads. And
finally, a national banking system uh,
to finance industry. uh this is what uh
Germany especially developed in the late
19th century but the banking system that
America had was the British Anglo Dutch
banking trade financing short-term
financing uh the fi the banking sector
in Britain and all over Europe did not
do much to fund industrial development
uh uh the the steam engine James Watt
had to develop it with his own money I
think he took out a real estate mortgage
And uh banks would lend against uh
assets that already were in place like
real estate or stocks or bonds or some
sort of wealth that they could foreclose
on, but they wouldn't lend to create new
industrial investment. And so that was
what uh Henry Clay meant by creating uh
an American bank. And all that had to be
created from scratch because there
wasn't any model of uh doing it except
for British mercantalism uh- which had
uh developed into what was called free
trade imperialism and free trade was
imperialistic because Britain uh
dominated the market and the market's
price structure and other countries
could not afford the capital investment
to put in place factories and uh uh
roads to get to them and uh public
infrastructure without uh a kind of
government support. And uh by the time
uh Britain achieved its industrial
leadership of the world, it was against
uh uh governments for other countries
doing what it had done uh and nurturing
its own industry. So the the problem
that was confronting the Americans in
the 1820s all the way through the 19th
century was how do you reject Britain's
claim that free trade was universal?
There was only one kind of economic
theory, basic universal principles that
all countries should follow. And these
principles were based on free markets,
meaning free trade, which meant trade
dependency on uh England making other
countries, as the Americans put it,
heers of wood and drawers of water.
supply a biblical phrase supplying raw
materials to England to be worked up
into manufacturers in Lancashire or
other uh British weaving towns and uh
reexported to the United States. So
writing in uh support of protective
tariffs in a national bank, Henry Clay's
biographer and promoter Kelvin Colton
wrote a book called Public Economy for
the United States ex and he explained
that the precepts of British political
economy were quote entirely inapplicable
to the United States whose distinct
historical experience institutions made
it an exception to any set broad
economic generalities. Well, that's not
uh uh nationalism. Nationalism says that
uh you were the universal force uh over
other countries uh uh dominating them.
Uh the the Americans just said no, we're
not subject to a uh a set of
international trade rules that lead to
our dependency on England.
And so, uh, Colton wrote, I'm going to
quote, &amp;quot;A science cannot be made out of
the laws of political economy except for
one nation each by itself.&amp;quot;
unquote. An American economic growth was
nurtured, he said, by a protectionist
policy that aimed at retaining uh
precious bullion, gold and silver in the
United States is the foundation for
creating an industrial and commercial
superstructure of bank credit. Uh so
what Colton wrote and I'm going to quote
it because it's so uh the these
economists have been airbrushed out of
economic history and uh people will not
have come across them in the usual uh
economic history textbooks. Colton
wrote, &amp;quot;We want then a system of
political public economy which shall and
o not only tend to keep in the country
what is commonly reckoned uh enough of
money to carry on its trade and
commerce, but we want a system that
shall tend to increase that amount as
far as may be in a degree commensurate
with the development of the the means
for its profitable use.&amp;quot; In other words,
not the userybased banking that England
had. So I think it's most appropriate to
think of the American school of
political economy. That's how they
describe themselves as an American
school. Uh and they thought historically
viewing the whole world economy as a
system which uh tended to polarize under
free trade. Uh and some countries were
winners and other countries were losers.
And under free trade, America was a a
loser. Uh they were concerned about how
do you introduce industrial technology
and uh what are the preconditions uh for
industry? And the answer was sort of an
um a uh technological systems analysis.
What do you need in order to uh set up a
system of uh factory uh uh production?
And uh if anything, the American
protectionists had to confront
opposition not only from England, but
from the slave uh south. The south
didn't want to see any industry develop.
The South didn't want to see uh national
banks at all to uh extend credit because
the South said uh well, if you have an
industrial population growing, they're
going to want food and if they eat food,
they're going to bid up the price of
grain and that's going to make it more
expensive for us to feed our slaves uh
as we produce cotton and uh tobacco uh
to send to Lancashire and uh England uh
uh to do it. So there was a fight in the
United States not only against England
but against uh the south. They were uh
opposition uh each each section of the
United States had its own body of uh
economic theory. Not exactly a single
nationalist theory. The southerners were
nationalists. The America North was
nationalist. The middle states were you
could say all of them were pro-American.
uh but all of them had an entirely
different idea of what it meant to be
American and how the United States
should structure its politics and its
economics. Well, if
anything, uh uh the uh the
the American school developed really
after the Republican party broke from
the Quigs largely over the slave issue
in
1853 when it was uh the Republicans were
formed and uh the leading economist who
essentially drew up the Republican
program was Arasmus Peshine Smith, a
name that I'm sure is unfamiliar.
to anyone who hasn't read uh uh my
books. Uh Smith was the law partner of
William Seard who was the ideological
leader of the Republican party and the
abolitionists.
uh and uh Seward became Secretary of
State under uh Lincoln and uh he brought
Peshine Smith into the government and
Peshine Smith in 1853 wrote a manual of
political economy and he developed a
whole theory of value uh and price and
he said the key what really determines
the value of a commodity is the the cost
of energy uh the energy per worker and
he said The whole history of technology
was a movement from uh water uh energy,
you know, the the uh flow of water
turning windmill, wind energy uh with
windmills, uh coal uh wood burning uh uh
energy. And as the cost of energy went
down, that was reducing the energy cost
of production. And the way to uh for any
country to develop a competitive ind
industry was to supply uh energy per
worker and energy uh and that would
lower uh the cost of production. The uh
Alexander Hamilton had explained all of
this in his report on manufacturers when
he said that uh a ma a machine uh could
produce the equivalent of labor power uh
at a much lower cost. And uh what labor
power was to Hamilton to the Americans
was how how do you mechanize production
and uh uh provide uh low uh lowcost
energy? That was a technological
approach to value theory that the
Americans had. Uh and it was quite
different from uh the British theory uh
that uh of value that focused on
economic rent. Well, uh the the other uh
point that u uh that Clay had is well in
in order to develop industry, you not
only need production, you need
distribution. And uh how are you going
to distribute and uh handle the
transportation uh infrastructure for all
this? And he said uh he said you have to
have the public sector develop this. And
uh the Americans picked up the uh
classical political economy of England
distinguishing between price and value.
And uh the different the excess of
market price over cost value was
economic rent, unearned uh income. Well,
in Britain, the focus of all of this was
to define land rent to tax it away and
get rid of the landed aristocracy that
Britain had. the United States applied
it very primarily to monopoly rent and
they said if we leave u the Erie Canal
or other public enterprises in private
hands you uh you're going to end up like
Margaret Thatcher and regonomics they
didn't know Margaret Thatcher but they
knew that if uh that uh c uh certain in
any infrastructure that provided basic
needs and basic services was a natural
monopoly and these should be kept in
private hands uh in I mean I'm sorry
these should be kept in public hands so
that it wouldn't be monopolized and
the services of uh canals uh
infrastructure colleges uh whatever uh
the government invested in should be
provided at subsidized prices at low
prices or even freely in the case of
education. Well, uh this was very
different from the focus of British uh
theory because Americans didn't have a
vested landed aristocracy inherited from
feudalism. Uh they just stole the land
from the Indians uh basically uh and uh
they were more concerned about
monopolies uh and that included the
financial monopoly of uh uh British
domination. So the question is how are
they going to spread these ideas of
Hamilton, Frederick List, Peshine Smith
and uh they uh weren't going going to
retrain the economic professors at
Harvard and other uh prestige
universities which as I said were
founded to uh train the priesthood uh
basically. So the Republicans said uh
it's easier just to start all over again
and uh introdu and create new
universities with new economics
curricula uh themselves. And so uh they
be founded land grant colleges in the
United States. You'd give land to uh uh
a college and the the rents from the
land would enable the college to uh
provide uh the expenses of teaching
courses. And the courses they taught and
the textbooks they used were essentially
how to uh develop a uh an industrial
economy in the United States uh by uh
public uh investment uh in not only in
technology but also in banking and uh
protective tariffs to raise the prices
so that American industrialists would
have enough money to uh use uh their
sales proceeds to invest in building new
factories and new means of production
and hiring more labor to ex uh to
expand. And uh the industrialists uh
also in in addition to the government uh
back creating land grant colleges,
industrialists endowed business schools
uh to teach uh this kind of
uh businessoriented protectionist
economics. And uh the uh this whole
school as I mentioned has been uh
neglected uh in economic history because
it's uh once the United States uh
followed its uh precepts and became an
industrial leader after World War I. The
last thing the United States wanted to
do was to teach other countries how to
be protectionists and in the way that it
had done. and uh it it wanted to be free
trade just as England after its
mercantalist policies uh created its own
industrial leadership uh wanted other
countries not uh not to do as it did but
to pull up the intellectual ladder so to
speak. So uh the the uh the the American
school wanted to develop this theory of
how do you create an industrial power uh
and in the process and void the kind of
class conflict between capital and
labor. There was a little bit of
idealism there that made uh Markx uh
make make fun of them. Uh I published
many of the books from this school in
the 19
uh60s and 1970s when I worked for the
reprinter of economic classics Augustus
Kelly and later for Garland Press. Uh I
I I reprinted uh these books with
introductions. Uh they were sold to
libraries because in the 60s and 70s
there was a lot of money that the
government provided for libraries during
the uh Vietnam War. uh but I don't think
many people ever took them out of the
libraries and I summarized my research
in uh my book America's protectionist
takeoff 1815 to 1914 uh and I reviewed
all of the dynamics and I also discussed
uh uh this whole development in my
history of trade theory trade
development and foreign debt uh so I
I've spent uh the early decades of my
intellectual life was spent on analyzing
izing how America got rich through
industrialization. And um how uh the
Germany also followed the same logic of
how do how do you have uh the the
government work with industry and work
with banking to create a three-part uh
uh symbiosis uh to develop industry. It
doesn't just develop by itself. Uh
protective tariffs were only supposed to
protect this idea of public investment
in infrastructure and uh domestic
banking that was geared not just to
financing commerce and uh uh current
trade not just uh to make loans against
real estate or assets but actually to
fund new capital investment. That was a
completely different financial f policy
uh of England and u neither the United
States nor Germany said well this is
nationalist uh this is you know our
development they all said this is how
nations have to develop is how the world
periphery has to develop in order to uh
achieve economic balance with the
leading nations at that time England uh
in order to prevent uh trade and
investment and international lending
from being exploitative. So that uh I
wouldn't exactly call that
nationalist. It was universal. Yeah.
Well, it's um it's funny you said how
they well, you said pulled up the
intellectual ladder because uh it is
true that the British uh they did
subsidize their their industries to
develop this uh industrial dominance in
the world and as Fredic criticized once
they had reached this dominant position
then they suddenly switched over to free
trade. So in his argument uh yeah which
is famous phrase in political economies
you know kicking away the ladder that
they climbed up to greatness. So uh
because his argument was other countries
wouldn't be able to properly
industrialize and uh as an important
part of nation building if they did have
this
um yeah w without uh well if they did
commit themselves to free trade because
under free trade the rest of the world
as you said they were confronted with
mature British industries. So the
British industry is again by definition
high quality and low cost. So how could
possibly any other you know continental
Europeans or the Americans industrialize
if they had
u infant industries that is uh low
quality high cost and this is what many
people also don't will miss with u with
uh Adam Smith and David Ricardo they
were advocating for the US to focus on
exporting grain they didn't need to
industrialize the you know in the
international division of labor the
British would produce goods and the
Americans could yeah grow corn and uh
you know the French could make wine. I
mean this was effectively the idea and
what is interesting though with as this
idea from Hamilton and Clay it really
spread more towards Germany with
Frederick list and then Persia and Smith
brought it to Asia well with Japan and
Serge Vite copied all the stuff well not
copied made pamplets from the ideas of
Fredic list and spread in Russia so
these ideas were quite dominant it's
just it is it is a bit surprising how it
suddenly disappeared as you said was uh
airbrushed away from econ economic
history. And I guess that's why it's
interesting. It's coming back now big
time because in those days the Americans
were condemning free trade as
imperialism because it would undermine
the ability of American nation building
but they complained they instead of
calling for free trade they called fair
trade. And what I find interesting now
is Trump, not only is he talking in the
language of um some of this, he's
calling also for fair trade instead of
free trade at times. And uh he's also
looking now at u yeah using well again
not necessarily temporary tariffs and
subsidies to build strategic industries
but is tariff as he says is his
favorite word or or weapon or tool
whatever he wants. But uh as you have
argued uh Trump tends to is a bit
misguided on these things on the tariffs
and the whole economic model of the 19th
century when the Americans
industrialized. Uh how um uh what do you
think specifically he gets wrong? Well,
I do agree with that. Tariffs are not
enough by themselves to industrialize.
And uh the advocates of
industrialization didn't only talk about
industry. Uh what Frederick List did
when he went back to Germany was
emphasized the need for railroads. Uh
and that the railroads had to develop be
developed by the government uh in order
not just to have uh railroad monopolies
being created and uh do the destructive
rent seeking and exploitation that they
did in the United States uh when they
were left in private hands. So uh
government uh the key is not only
protective tariffs to have high prices
uh for industrial products to uh create
uh enable industrialists to invest. You
needed government support especially to
provide basic services that as I said
otherwise would be monopolized. uh uh
you could there were uh in 1890 the
United States passed the Sherman
antitrust law to regulate trusts and you
had Teddy Roosevelt trust busting but
we've all seen what happens that uh the
industries that are regulated tend to
take over the regulators called
regulatory capture and uh it's really
very difficult to uh regulate an
industry that gets powerful enough to
corrupt the political system as uh
you've seen in the United States with
bank regulation uh that ended up with
all the uh bank corruption of the 1980s
with the savings and loan associations
and later under Obama uh the junk
mortgage bubble. So the uh the uh Trump
makes no attempt at all to reverse the
thatcherite reggonomics that led to
monopolization of the key sectors in the
United States and made the United States
so high cost. Uh the privatization of
health care for instance now absorbs uh
18% of America's GDP. That's vastly more
than any other country. And uh uh that
means that industry has to uh pay its
employees uh medical uh part part of the
cost of medical insurance and that
increases the cost of labor without
really increasing the disposable
personal income uh that its employees
get. Well, all of this was spelled out
uh by Simon Patton who was the first
professor of economics at America's
first business school, the Wharton
School at the University of
Pennsylvania. And uh Patton said that
private investment, public investment in
infrastructure was a fourth factor of
production. And he meant it's a factor
of income receipt. uh capital made
profits and uh labor wanted to increase
wages and landlords wanted land rent and
economic rent. But the aim of public
infrastructure was not to make
uh more income. It wasn't to make a
profit and it was certainly wasn't to
make economic rent. It was to provide
basic services at subsidized prices or
even freely like education and health
care and other basic needs. So that the
uh private sector would not have to bear
these costs for itself in the form of
paying labor uh its employees enough uh
income to have to pay for these ser
services itself from monopolies. And uh
you're it's it's I think America has
painted itself into acherite regonomics
corner where it can't simply go back and
uh get rid of uh the private privatized
monopolies and take them back into the
public domain. Uh obviously uh you have
the Democrats uh fighting even more than
the Republicans in trying to uh oppose
Bernie Sanders and his attempt to
provide uh uh health care to vastly
lower the cost of production which would
be a precondition for making labor more
uh productive. Uh, America has an
enormous debt overhead uh that it's
built up. Every I think we've talked
before, every recovery since 1945 in
America and Europe has a higher and
higher level of debt. And so labor has
to pay so much money uh just on uh debt
service that uh it has to earn a wage
high enough to cover its uh growing
debt. that's priced it out of the
market. So you have what I call the fire
sector, finance, insurance, and real
estate. This the this is sort of the
sphere of circulation. Uh that's what
Markx called it in contrast to the
sphere of production. And you want to
minimize the cost of circulation. Uh
which right now is taken by rent seekers
just as you want to minimize the cost of
industrial production. But most of the
cost of uh industry and uh in the United
States is this uh is takes the form of
economic rent. Not actual cost of living
and cost of production, not value as the
classical economist described it, but
price economic rent. Uh and uh these
privatized interests are so powerful
that college education costs $50,000 a
year. uh and I said health care 18% of
GDP uh well you're not going to have the
colleges go back to free education uh
because they've become uh enterprises uh
uh themselves. So all of this for uh
America to be re-industrialized as Trump
claims to be doing all of this rent
seeking would have to be reversed in
order to make American industry
competitive. And uh tariffs don't uh
address that. And uh what Trump wants to
do is exactly the opposite. He wants to
make to increase rent seeking. He wants
to make American uh labor much more
expensive to uh employ at the same time
that he wants to lower disposable wage
income. This is a class war we're seeing
in the United States. Uh he wants to uh
essentially shrink government and sell
off government to the private sector.
That's what uh Elon Musk is trying to do
for him. It's what Trump is trying to
do. He's trying to get the antithesis of
uh what made uh the United States uh an
industrial power in the first in the
first place. He wants to basically
create a neofudalism of uh rent seekers
dominating the economy and uh stifling
uh in industrial production and
especially uh stifling the wages of
labor by offshoring labor. That's why
they moved uh uh to China to offshore
it. So uh Trump's uh u fantasy that uh
somehow tariffs can uh create uh
industrialization uh is completely
ahistorical. And the fact is uh what he
really wants is something completely
different. What he really wants to do is
uh get rid of the income tax for his uh
main campaign donors. Uh the he wants to
get rid of the tax on the wealthy
people. And he says, well, if we can
shift the government uh tax system onto
labor through uh tariffs that are
basically a tax on consumers uh who are
going to bear the cost of the tariffs,
then uh we can uh you we can cut the
taxes on my con my donor class uh the uh
the rontier class and uh uh we'll really
win the class war. we can impoverish our
our our labor force and make the 1% even
richer and more powerful over the rest
of the economy. That's his
plan. Yeah. I think uh yeah, the whole
cold war struggle though of you know
communism versus free market capitalism
I think it created a very false uh um
yes false assumption of only having two
alternatives. I think the whole origin
of industrial capitalism, it really
should be relearned if uh yeah, we want
to re-industrialize and actually get
back to uh yeah, a more balanced
economy. Anyways, uh yeah, Professor
Hudson, uh thank you so much for your
time. Well, thank you for having me,
Glenn.
