Hi everyone and welcome. Today we are joined by Michael Hudson, a professor of economy uh to discuss uh the strategies for the American empire. Now when we look at empire we tend often to look at uh military capabilities and deployment but as we know empires also require an economic foundation. So uh to explore this we're going to uh look into one of uh professor Michael Hudson's uh great books that is uh super imperialism the economic strategy of American empire. So I will put a link to the book in the description. So uh please make sure to have a look and uh yeah welcome back to the program. Thanks for having me Glenn. And uh yeah, after we address the well look at the economic strategy for the American Empire, it would be interesting to get your take on how some of these uh I guess economic foundations are uh well less stable now than the war when your first version of this book came out. Uh but uh I I thought a good place to start uh would be how you see the well what you name one of the sections of your book the birth of the American world order. What what is that the yeah what what is the foundation for the economic strategy of the American Empire? Well, the Americans never attempted uh apart from the war of 1898, they have not attempted military overt colonialism in the sense that uh Europe did. Uh it has turned out to be financial colonialism and financial imperialism. And uh the the actual attempt to create an empire as such wasn't really implemented until 1944 and 1945 when World War II ended. But the roots of all of it were founded in u at the end of uh World War I when the the settlement of World War I ended up imposing uh American demands for repayment of the war debts that the United States had lent to Britain, France, and other allies before the United States had entered the war. Well, when the war ended, the Europeans expected what would be normal uh practice and what was the practice after the Napoleonic wars, for instance, that uh the allies would forgive the debts uh to each other because this was all supposed to be part of the war effort, not only supplying armies, but supplying uh the funds, the money to buy the the arms. But the United States said, "Well, we agree with you. Of course, we will not think of charging you for all the expenses of the war once we entered it on your side against Germany. But before we entered the war, that was something else. We were a neutral party and we expect you to pay the war debts that you took on. A debt is a debt. Well, the uh the allies then turned on Germany and uh said, "Well, uh we don't want to have to pay uh the debts to the United States. Quite frankly, we don't have the money to pay the debts that the United States has calculated that we owed. We'll make Germany pay reparations." And uh by 1921 uh 222 when all of this was uh set up uh that that essentially became uh the rule. Uh so uh I have to say that Europe was somewhat complicit in this. All of the European countries, including Germany, believed that a debt was a debt. And if that was the official debt, if it was uh the reparations imposed on Germany uh to to pay for the war by the allies uh against it, uh was clearly beyond its ability. All of the parties in Germany, even the social democrats and the anti-war parties, agreed that the debts had to be repaid. Well, we know the result. Uh Germany uh had only one way to pay because it it had lost its uh its main uh most productive steel uh industry, its lands, Alaster Lraine. uh it was financially crippled by the Versailles treaty and the only way that it could pay the debts were to throw uh rice marks its currency onto the foreign exchange market to buy the uh the dollars to what ended up the dollars to repay uh its debts to the allies that the allies simply passed on to the United States as their payment of the inter ally debts. Well, the result is that uh uh Germany had a hyperinflation. The United States uh didn't want to enable Germany to earn the money to pay the allies to pay it because that would have threatened American industry. So the United States passed a tariff against uh importing currencies with de uh depreciating currencies namely uh Germany. So Germany was left without any way of paying. Uh what happened was uh the American investors lent German cities and and local states uh money uh to borrow. the uh the cities that borrowed their uh dollars in order to fund their own local budgets turned the dollars over to the Reichsbank. The Reichkes Bank used these dollars to pay the allies and the allies paid the United States. So what was established was a circular flow and it was all based ultimately on the demand for gold and uh America's buildup of international power uh between World War I and World War II all reflected it uh its increasing power of gold against which all of the major currencies were convertible and during by the time uh the that Germany collapsed into Nazism. There was a massive flight capital out of Europe to the United States that uh led to the US gold supply growing uh even more. So that by the time World War II ended, the United States controlled the great bulk of the world's monetary gold. And uh because Europe was devastated, the United States was also in a position to dictate how the international uh trade and financial system was going to operate upon the return to peace. And so the United States uh used uh its power uh to create the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, uh international trade organizations and bilateral diplomacy. basically to uh very quickly absorb what had been the British Empire. Uh the United States had kept sterling afloat by lending sterling the uh the money to uh balance its international payments and recover after World War II. But the condition was that uh Britain had opened the sterling area to uh let uh India and and other countries that had built up their gold their sterling balances during World War II to uh be able to spend these balances not limited to British industry but to the United States. And so the United States basically uh there were a number of plans to uh try to by uh John Maynard Kanes uh to create some assurance that the post-war order wouldn't be so unbalanced that all the gold and all the power would flow to the United States. The United States rejected them and they created the IMF and the World Bank basically to serve US national interests. Uh I don't know if you want me to go into the details. Uh for instance uh the World Bank was supposed to lend other countries money to uh develop their economies. But uh the first uh Europe and then uh what are now the global south countries. They were called developing countries at that time. But the World Bank policy for ever from World War II ever down to today was uh not to uh provide loans for countries to be self-sufficient in any kind of uh commodities that the United States uh controlled. And the the United States balance of payments a since World War II has been was based very largely on food exports as well as uh control of the uh oil industry as we're seeing today. And so the uh the there was no attempt at all by the World Bank to uh follow the recommendations of its own economists. uh the World Bank uh undertook a very series of country studies and every uh study that it did of Latin America or the Middle East said well you you have to have land reform uh you have to enable farming to do in these countries what the United States did in the United States with its agricultural adjustment act very strongly uh uh o organizing government support of farming to support grain to become indep independent and be able to feed yourself that that was a prime aim of uh uh self-sufficiency. Uh historically the United States uh the World Bank uh basically made loans to finance international trade dependency on the United States and that was where the international monetary fund uh came in. uh the monetary fund uh applied a uh uh the same um uh self-destructive economic philosophy that the United States and Europe had followed uh after World War I. Uh there was a great debate after World War I between John Maynard Kanes in England um and uh the anti-German economists uh from France and from uh from the United States saying uh yes uh the debts really are not unpayable. Any country can pay any foreign debt volume at all if it depreciates its currency to such a low point that its exports become competitive. And in practice uh the IMS philosophy is uh if countries would simply lower the cost of labor uh it had a labor theory of value uh as it were. If if countries can impose austerity and uh cut back the government budgets not to run a budget deficit to uh pump money into the economy then uh deflation and low wages will enable these countries to pay their foreign debt. uh that was uh the pol that has been the policy of the International Monetary Fund ever since uh its uh its foundation in 1945. And that uh uh deflationary austerity philosophy has been largely responsible for preventing the global south countries and uh Middle Eastern and Asian countries from uh finance being able to uh finance themselves at the same time that they have to pay uh foreign debts to pay the loans that they had to undert take in order to finance their trade deficits with the United States uh since World War II. And these as these trade deficits have grown and grown and grown uh countries have uh countries scrambled uh to obtain the dollars and in effect that meant uh the gold to pay the debts that they had to pay. putting the interest of foreign creditors uh the United States government above all but also United States bond holders and banks above their own domestic development. Well, you can imagine what happened uh uh to uh to threaten this dynamic that the United States had put in place to make uh essentially to make itself the beneficiary of the division of labor and the specialization of production between the United States as the leading industrial nation and other countries as suppliers of raw materials uh to it and low-wage manu. manufacturers. There was a kind of it was called a dual economy uh structure uh one economy for the United States uh and to a lesser extent Europe and the other economy for countries that uh the global south countries and countries that were not uh self-sufficient. Well, what uh ended all of this started uh in 195051 with the Korean War. Uh between the end of World War I, World War II, I'm sorry, between 1945 and 1950, the United States gold stock had actually increased to 80% of the world's monetary gold. Now that meant that the United States uh owning gold and uh the uh the insistence uh that all currencies of uh the major countries be defined in terms of gold meant that the United States had an overwhelming financial power. In 1950, for the first time, the United States moved into a balance of payments deficit u as a result of the its military spending uh uh connected to the uh the Korean War. And from 1950s on, uh, right down through the end of the 1970s, uh, the United States moved into balance of payments deficit that was settled by having to pay gold to the countries that were receiving the dollars that the United States was uh, throwing off. And uh, these uh, the entire deficit was uh, a result of military spending. I I worked for uh first for the Chase Manhattan Bank as their balance of payments analyst and then for Arthur Anderson, the accounting firm uh analyzing the US balance of payments, showing that uh the entire deficit was military uh in character. Well, you can imagine what happened during the Vietnam War uh of the late 1960s. Uh when I was at Chase, every Friday morning, we would look at the Federal Reserve reporting of what is the US uh uh gold stock uh doing this week? How much gold uh did uh America have to send to France when General De Gaulle was uh uh receiving? The dollars that America was throwing off inh what had been French Indo-China, Vietnam, uh Cambodia, uh Laos, uh these dollars were uh were all sent to France that were cashed in for gold by uh by France. Well, Germany was also obtaining a lot of dollars that other countries receiving the American military spending were spending on German industrial exports. So uh well we would watch uh week by week by week the claims on the American gold stock uh rising and it was obvious that if if the America's cold war spending continued at the rate it was going at some point it could not uh it would run out of enough gold that was needed to legally cover the US paper currency. uh every dollar prior to 1971 uh the dollar bills that you had uh in your pocket had to be backed 25% by the gold supply. And by 1971, President Nixon realized that this was no longer uh the case. We he closed the gold window and said uh we we cannot afford to uh pay the cost of our military spending uh in Asia and throughout the whole world uh and gold anymore. Uh there was some panic within the United States government. Well, a year after uh almost uh to the month, a year after the uh United States went off gold in August 1971, my superimperialism was published uh uh in uh I think August September 1972. And uh it turned out that the largest purchasers, I'm told, uh were uh the the CIA uh and uh the defense department who'd bought it through the Washington uh bookstores. And uh my friends at Drexel Burnham uh the investment bankers uh came to me and said, "Look, what are you doing in academia? We're going to invite you to address our annual meeting. Herman Khan will be there. uh he's going to love uh your presentation and uh he's going to offer you a job uh uh except it leave academia. So indeed uh I I explained to them that uh the ending of uh America's payment in gold did not have to mean the end of American power. just the opposite that once foreign countries no longer could use their dollars to spend on US gold, they had only one practical choice given the arrangement of international financial diplomacy at the time. They now what did they use their dollars for? They bought the safest investment there was US treasury securities, treasury bonds, treasury bills. And so what happened that as the United States spent military spending abroad, it got in the recipients uh the turned their dollars over to the central banks for their own local currency. The central banks uh invested these dollars in US Treasury securities and that financed not only the foreign military spending by the United States but it financed the budget deficit that within the United States was primarily uh military uh in character, the military-industrial complex. And I pointed that what uh had happened was that uh instead of being a disaster by ending the United States control of the world economy through its gold supply, it uh other countries uh really had no uh alternative but to have their own central banks themselves finance US military spending domestically and foreign uh by recycling their dollars. Well, uh, uh, Herman Khan hired me. I went to work for this, uh, uh, Hudson Institute. Uh, he said, you know, why are you hoping that your classes of maybe 50 graduate students at the new school are going to end up maybe somebody's going to be a senator or something later, uh, if you if you join the Hudson Institute, I'll take you to the White House and, uh, introduce you and we'll get a contract uh, and you'll become a government adviser in all this. and uh uh it seemed to make sense. Uh and uh so the defense department gave the uh Hudson Institute an $85,000 grant, much more than I'd gotten as an advance for superimperialism for me to uh go back and forth to the War College and to walk to the White House and other venues to explain what I just said. uh that other that uh the US dollar standard that I called the treasury bill standard of international finance had replaced the gold standard and that essentially locked other countries is uh into the financial support of American spending abroad and and that going off gold essentially removed the limit on military spending. I gave one uh talk at the White House to Treasury officials uh with Herman Khan and we said gold is you can think of it as the peaceful metal because if other countries have to pay the their balance of payments deficits in gold, any country waging war, any country entailing a very major uh military expenditure abroad and uh to fight a war always entails running a big deficit is going to have to uh run out of gold and lose its uh uh its power in a system that's based on gold. Well, immediately the Treasury people said, "Oh, we don't want that. We don't want because it's America uh that is going to war. It's America that's spending almost all of the world's uh military uh budget. uh and we don't want uh gold to play a role in any system that uh the United States cannot control and we can't control uh gold outflows if we have to convert our dollars into gold. So actually uh to deprive other countries of any ability to cash in their dollars into gold means they've been co-opted into a financial system. And it's at that point that America truly became an empire because the entire world's financial system uh and it was therefore its tax system, its fiscal system, its money creation uh was basically directed uh by the US Treasury uh to to finance the costs of what America claimed were the needs of its empire in creating its 800 military bases. all over the world and in waging the wars that it's uh been fighting since the 1970s. Uh and that is uh until this year uh other countries were willing to be part of this system because the uh the facts of geopolitics led them to uh uh to support uh uh the US military spending but also because there wasn't an alternative. Well, uh, today uh, with President uh, Trump's, uh, budget that he and the Republicans have sent to Congress, the American debt, domestic debt has been so great and its foreign debt, the foreign central banks and the foreign investors uh, including private quasi government funds such as Saudi Arabia and uh, Norway uh, have uh, be have realized that the foreign debt that central banks hold that was supposed to be as good as gold and the safest asset to buy it cannot be paid. There is no way that the United States can or would or is willing to uh somehow pay the amount of money that it uh uh other countries hold as loans to the United States. Mainly Treasury bills, but also US agencies, Fanny May, government agencies pay a little bit more than the Treasury. uh and uh even corporate securities such as Saudi Arabia holds and uh Norway holds. There's no way that America is willing to pay these debts either by exporting because it's de-industrialized and it can't it's not running an export surface anymore or by selling off its uh uh its industry to foreign buyers. The United States until 19 this year has uh said that if foreign countries uh could not pay uh uh their finance their balance of payments deficits, they had to do so by privatizing their uh public utilities, selling off their infrastructure to foreigners, selling off their mineral rights, selling off their land uh to foreign investors. uh this the United States is not willing to do what it's insisted that other countries do as the basis of world trade and investment that it's created. So uh other countries realize this double standard that uh they're really not getting uh savings that can be converted into ownership of US uh industry or agriculture or infrastructure or uh anything else. They're just uh paper dollars. And so uh for the first time uh you're having an a move to seek alternative uh to the US dollars. Well, the uh the only alternative so far that people can agree upon is gold. And u when uh Herman Khan and I went to the White House in 1973, uh Herman wrote a map of the world. And there was a map of countries uh that trusted uh governments uh and that was uh northern Europe, Europe as a whole, the United States, the English-speaking uh uh countries, countries whose populations did not trust governments. Well, you could call them the global majority. Most people didn't. Uh then he had countries that uh supported uh the gold uh the commodity uh money. Well, the there were countries like India, uh, Asia, uh, global south countries. Uh, they they wanted something secure, not an IOU. The countries that trusted paper money were Northern Europe uh, and uh, the the English-speaking uh, countries. So you you you have this faith in uh paper money that is a debt is a debt that and that was the principle on which America began to accumulate gold after World War I. Uh but uh the United States uh certainly the current uh budget that is before Congress is saying well yes uh a debt is a debt on the balance sheet. Yes, on the balance sheet we owe foreign countries more money than there's any way we can see can be repaid, but that's it. It's a debt that never will be repaid. Uh it's as if you went to the grocery store and tried to pay in an IOU and uh the grocery store would say, "Well, you run up quite a tab in the last week. You know, you got to pay." And the customer will say, "Well, I can't pay." uh what uh what uh uh but you can use this debt to maybe maybe you can give this IOU to the farm that's giving you the the eggs and the dairy or the vegetables that you're selling and somehow if only this IOU could be circulated uh is a claim on the customer then it would be technically it's a debt well a lot of the financial system and the world financial system is now based on that kind of debt that there's no ability to pay it behind it. And uh that is what has become the key uh you could say to American empire because it's the key to America's ability to spend abroad and be really the first uh nation in history that does not have to pay its war debts or other uh debts that it has run up to foreign countries. That's the double standard that America has been able to achieve uh to uh make it the unique nations or the indispensable uh nation and u that is is why right now other countries are buying gold and you can see the gold price going up uh and why they're trying to realize well that we can't spend all of our dollar holdings on gold. Isn't there some way we can create an alternative uh paper currency owed by other countries? Well, you have the bricks talking about that and you really can't have such a currency uh by other countries because to issue a currency you need a parliament to say, well, who's going to get the benefit of this currency? And if you issue the currency, what's it going to be spent on? Who's going to spend it? you'd have to be have something like uh a real uh Europe deciding who's going to get uh the result of euros that are being created except uh the euro the United States uh created the Euro zone in a way that it really can't run enough of a deficit to recover from the uh the downturn uh that it's now been forced into. So the the world is in a con a quandry and that's what uh my superimperialism is all about and I've tried to update it uh to the present but uh uh that's the basic theme. Well, I find this to be fascinating though that the US initially the massive power after World War II obviously based on America's position as a credit nation and uh obviously yeah the military force's privileged position in the World Bank IMF you know the US dollar but it's quite unique though isn't it that it became its as a deficit country it's uh growing debt became the source for for future for further yeah imperial strength but nonetheless this seems to be have always been a temporary model. I I do remember back in the '9s and early 2000s when you had the political leaders in Washington arguing that well actually our debt is a sign of strength. It shows that the world trusts our our our economy and trust our currency. However, this if it's not sustainable, at some point you'll hit a wall. And I I looked at the debt clock uh this morning and it's uh almost, you know, running into 37 trillion and this rise only intensifies. So at at some point uh you do need alternatives which appear to be emerging. You also mentioned uh you said facts of geopolitics. I guess one of the facts of geopolitics during the cold war was simply that the the yeah the main two rivals be it the Soviets and the Chinese were communist states largely you know decoupled from this kind of economic statecraft while the allies of the United States uh in the capitalist world all um you know had to prioritize as you said the facts of geopolitics that is you couldn't really U yeah, you couldn't allow too much economic squables go along. So, you know, there was some incentives to prevent uh rivalry between the capitalist industrial nations as you've had prior to uh World War II. But uh but where where are we heading now though? Because the again the debt model seems to have exhausted itself and the facts of geopolitics have changed. Now you have the key rivals be it China, Russia and others who are also embracing economic statecraft. How is um how are the foundations I guess of the American empire eroding? Uh the uh the debt model has not exhausted itself. uh and uh Trump has given a number of speeches and Congress has backed him up uh saying any country that is moving to establish an alternative to the dollar uh we're going to hit with a special tariffs uh up to 500% even. uh he said uh any attempt by countries to shift out of the dollar to the Chinese payment system uh towards China uh will be treated uh as an enemy and uh we will block their access to the United States market. uh what he's uh uh he's he realizes that America's power is no longer a a creditor country, but its power is precisely because it's a debtor country. Uh Kanes made a joke saying that if you owe $1,000 to a bank, then you're in trouble. If you owe a billion dollars to the bank, the bank's in trouble. And that's the United States strength. it owes so much money to other countries that uh if it doesn't pay for instance if it grab uh if it grabs the uh Russian savings that are uh were held in the United States and in Brussels it'll confiscate it uh then the savings poof disappear the the debt is basically enulled uh the United States is unwilling to enull global south uh debt that can't be paid but it has uh any attempt by uh countries to break away from the United States dollar and the dollarization is treated as an act of war. Now that was uh explained to me by the Treasury Secretary already in 1974 and75 with the the oil war uh when uh the uh uh Saudi Arabia and the OPEC countries uh quadrupled the price of oil in response to uh the United States quadrupling the price of grain. uh and uh uh the United States told them uh that uh if they they could charge whatever price of oil they wanted to. That was fine with the United States because the United States controlled much of the world oil industry including the domestic uh oil production and the United States uh uh oil companies had a price umbrella as the price of oil went. However, uh the condition for uh for letting OPEC countries raise the price of oil was that all of their export earnings would be recycled into the United States uh didn't have to be only in uh treasury securities. It could be in stocks and bonds, but only a minority ownership. Uh so the Saudi uh kings uh bought I think uh a billion dollars of every stock in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Uh they they they spread their savings over uh the US bond and uh stock market in a way that did not uh involve any ability to control the companies whose stocks they owned. in contrast to uh most stockholders who try to have some voice in the company's management. So uh that's a situation we have today. Imagine what's happening in the near east now when uh the Saudi Arabia uh Kuwait the United Arab Republics all own uh have huge holdings of US securities. They've seen the United States grab uh Russia's uh savings. They've seen uh the United States through England confiscate uh Venezuela's uh oil uh uh gold uh holdings and the Bank of England. And the whole process began uh with the Iranian uh uh Kumain the Iranian uh revolution against the sha when chase uh Iran uh tried to pay the interest due on its foreign debt and Chase Manhattan refused to uh make the payment. Iran was counted as default and immediately uh foreclosed upon. uh uh the other the rest of the Neareastern countries that are major holders of American debt are locked in to they're fearful of uh acting in any way that would oppose the current fight uh US buildup uh against Iran because anything they do uh whether it's to support uh uh the Palestinians uh or to support Iran or uh anything that uh is at odds with uh US diplomacy in the near east would result in the United States holding all of their savings in its own pocket under their control, able to freeze them or confiscate them uh at will. That's the power that America has as a debtor over other countries. And that's why uh Trump has said any attempt to dedarize is an act of war today. just as they were told uh 50 years ago in uh countries were told way back in 197475. Well, there's also an old truth though that is any system which uh becomes too dependent on coercion will eventually uh begin to I guess um degrade over time and there's uh well the the whole thing that the the whole world u uh that America owes money to the whole world so America sits on their piggy bank or their savings and can take it whenever they It it seems as as if it only works to such an extent and I I can appreciate the theft of the Venezuelan gold and all of this, but it look looked as if the stealing the Russian sovereign funds was really one step too far because when there's no trust anymore in the system, it can't really work. And we see not just the opponents such as China being worried because they know they're never going to get all their money back, but but also countries like India are concerned about secondary sanctions and yeah, other American allies. So, how um how long can this uh I guess new changing character of the American empire uh continue? because uh well from my perspective one of the key things driving China these days is exactly the the the search for alternatives because they are you know preparing themselves for a almost neverending uh trade war with the United States and they can't really outsource everything from their financial stability you know to the goodwill of the United States so uh surely the rest of the world are looking for alternatives to escape US financial control. Well, you've summarized the dilemma perfectly. Uh trust is gone, but so far there's no alternative. So the answer to your question is to how long this system can last until there's an alternative. And that's why the United States uh foreign policy now to maintain uh what you could call its financial empire uh and control of world trade and investment is based on preventing any alternative uh that uh might come uh be developed. Uh obviously the countries running the strongest balance of payments and trade surpluses are the logical sponsors of such an alternative. China uh oil oil producing countries. Uh this is why the United States is designated China. uh and any country that looks uh powerful enough to create an alternative is viewed as a uh potent an enemy and uh the US tries to prevent uh and preempt they're creating an alternative uh form of international monetary savings by uh uh imposing sanctions uh on them that are counterproductive. But it's uh the the United States uh strategy or trying to uh organize European diplomacy and diplomacy of its uh proxies and satellites uh uh to somehow delay this development that as you point out it's inevitable. Yes. Someday the United States cannot get a free lunch anymore. Uh the and uh the first step in preventing a free lunch is for other countries to recognize that there is a free lunch and that they're not they're uh essentially giving up money that that loses their control over it and actually funds the United States willing to take aggressive actions against them if they do anything to try to ensure real value for their money. Well, uh the the question is how uh with how long can the the US ability to control uh German politicians, European politicians, Asian politicians uh especially OPEC uh country politicians, how long can it actually threaten them to uh live in the short run? uh in the long run they realize the US cannot do it but living in the short run they can do tactics uh the problem is that the tactics that they're using are so heavy-handed that uh they're uh the opposite of strategy uh the the more they go to track uh to tactics of enforcing uh and threatening and bullying other countries uh the more they're destroying the strategy of actually making the United States a sufficiently viable economy to promise to actually have something to repay other countries with. I think the US plan is what the the Trump administration hoped for is that uh America can create an internet monopoly and a computer monopoly, an artificial intelligence monopoly, a chipmunk monopoly and uh somehow use its monopoly earnings to uh reverse the balance of payments deficit and uh reestablish world p power. That's a pipe drain. uh because in order to uh achieve technological do uh dominance, you need research and development and uh because the financial sector and corporations uh the private corporations that are inuh supposed to be developing this technological lead live in the short run uh they're using their most of their income for uh Apple and the other countries and buying off their own stocks and paying out as dividends to support their stock prices. So the the the the way in which the American economy is being financialized is actually undercutting its ability to maintain its financial power over the world because it's uh resulted in de-industrializing the United States economy that uh makes other countries uh feel even more queasy about what's happening to their savings uh invested here and uh what on earth can they do? So what you've seen in the last two weeks, last month is something very surprising. Uh the United States interest rates have been going up and up, but the dollar has been going down. This is the first time in history that uh when a country has raised its interest rates like the United States uh it actually loses uh there's an outflow of currency instead of attracting other countries to the world and arbitrage as uh uh European and uh Asian countries say well we can make a higher interest rate by borrowing cheap in our countries and buying these high yielding treasury uh 10-year Treasury securities at 4 and a.5%. % interest. Well, all of a sudden it's it doesn't work anymore. And that is what is panicking uh the Treasury and people who are actually trying to figure out how are we going to pay? The United States is turning into the condition that England was in after World War II of limping along and uh being uh unable to survive. The uh the difference is that there right now is no alternative that uh European and uh Neareastern countries are willing to accept uh as long as they refuse to accept China and Asia and Russia as an alternative. That's the that's uh exactly what is underlying the war uh America's uh insistence of the new cold war saying that China is our existential enemy. Uh we are going to try to drain uh Russia's uh uh for economy by uh the war in Ukraine. uh we're we've we're doing everything we can to disrupt the ability to other countries to be being an attractive alternative uh to the dollar. Th this attempt to maintain dollarization and prevent ddollarization uh and therefore ending the treasury bill standard is uh in a way that uh America cannot benefit either from the treasury bill standard or a gold standard. Uh this is the key to understanding not only American diplom diplomacy but the American military action against uh uh Iran today as part of its attempt to control uh the entire near east partly using uh Israel as its proxy uh and ISIS uh and al-Qaeda in Syria and Iraq as it as its proxies. Uh this is this is the key to why you have such a seemingly uh bizarre uh international uh military uh situation. How on earth would it can people people are saying how how is the Iran a threat to the United States? Well, it's a threat to the United States because it exists and the United States does not control it uh as the key to controlling the overall near east and all of the balance of trade surplus that near eastern oil draws in from the rest of the world. That's what makes uh the United States think of Iran, the war in Iran and the destruction of Iran as being as in the United States interest. It's the role of uh uh of Iran is the last uh uh potential alternative in the near east to US control of making the near east a client uh economy like it made Latin American economies clients for so many years. But this is uh the only path out of the current dilemma that is either establish some uh important tech monopolies in this new re industrial revolution or establish I guess quasi colony around the world. I mean it just appears that all of these initiatives even if one is optimistic amount to just kicking the can down the road. uh what are path what are possible pathways? I mean, if you would uh write a sequel to to your book now on super imperialism, where could the United States go from here if you want something more sustainable? Because it appears that uh um the the tech leadership, it's not going to monopolize on anything with the presence of China and uh it's also these colonies. Obviously, the it's not going to be able to make a colony out of Iran either, it seems. So uh what exactly are we looking at? Well, if you would have a not an attractive option for an academic, but if you would have a, you know, chapter of uh future speculation, where where we're heading, what what what would you see? The only way that the United States can remain a solvent economy is to give up the attempt to run the world with an empire. Empires do not pay. That's the lesson of history. Empires cost a lot of money and in the end uh the imperial power goes broke just as uh Britain went broke uh with its empire uh ending up uh turning uh uh turning its uh uh monetary power over to the United States. The French Empire went under empires don't pay. So the only way the United States can exist is being uh re-industrializing. That means definantializing its economy. You point out that we're living in the short run. How do we move to the long run? The financial sector lives in the short run. As long as uh the United States economy uh has shifted its central planning away from government to Wall Street and to the uh other financial centers. Uh these financial centers have a time frame of three months to a year. They're looking at what is the stock price doing for uh you know for for this quarter because that's what the u the bonuses of the chief financial officer and the CEOs are based on their stock price. So uh you you're having a uh an economic mentality in the United States that is essentially the neoliberal mentality of living in the short run making money financially instead of in a productive industrial agriculture and uh uh commercial way. So uh the United States would have to be just another country like all other countries. Uh it would have to be an equal. there would have to be a parity between the United States and other countries all following the same set of rules. That is anathema uh to Congress. There's still a a nationalism uh a populist nationalism here that says we don't want to be another country. We don't want to have to live by the rules that other countries uh live by. We want to continue to be able to dominate other countries because we worry that if other countries have the ability to become independent diplomatically, they may do something that we don't like. Well, as long as you have this mentality, you're going to end up setting yourself against the rest of the world. you're going to lose uh your ability to trade and uh make your economy an investment uh magnet for other countries. There's uh no way that other countries can uh invest in the United States with hope of making money from American uh corporate growth because uh the the growth that's occurring is only financial in character. stocks and bonds, real estate prices, asset price inflation financed by debt, creating more and more debt to bid up the price of real estate, bid up the price of bonds, bid up the price of stocks. That's what uh the uh zero interest rate policy uh uh was all about after 2008. uh the the the United States has been transformed from an industrial capitalist economy into a finance capitalist economy that actually is not the old-fashioned capitalism at all, but is purely financial. uh you could say it's closer to a neofudal economy than to the kind of industrial economy that the uh Britain, Germany, and the United States were becoming after world uh at the end of the 19th century up to World War I. Uh the kind of economy that gave them all of their world power in the first place. That kind of industrial uh productive non-financial uh power uh no longer exists in the west. So the problem's not only the United States, it's the neoliberal economic philosophy that has spread from that includes United States, Western Europe and America's major allies. So the real conflict between the United States and let's say China, Asia, and the global south is not simply a conflict over how they're going to hold and save their balance of payment surpluses. It's a conflict of economic systems. Are other countries going to uh uh create an economic system that is not military in character, that does not uh base itself on making financial wealth, but makes itself in creating public infrastructure uh such as China does base itself on on actual industrial growth, not rent seeking and that's sort of been left out of the economic models that are made. America's turned into a rontier economy, not an industrial economy. It makes money financially. It makes money for interest rates. It makes money by creating monopolies such as in the uh the tech sector. Uh but uh none of these are based on actual uh cost of production and and cost. It's all based on uh special privileges and special uh uh uh special distortions of the market away from everything that Adam Smith and John Stewart Mill and even Markx talked about. Uh what you have today is a form of capitalism that uh none of the classical economists or Markx anticipated. They all thought countries were going to act in their self-interest. And if you're forecasting what is going to happen to uh the United States and what the alternative is for Europe uh and you think well they'll act in their self-interest. You have to deal with the fact that countries are uh none of these countries are acting in their own self-interest. they're acting in a uh an economic model, a neoliberal model, a military model, a diplomatic uh uh institutional model that turns out not to be in their self-interest but is self-destructive. So all I can do is explain why it's self-destructive. And u uh uh I think that uh the natural tendency as I think you've hinted at is for other countries to follow uh creation of real wealth not financial wealth and that's uh there's a reason why China has been growing so rapidly with its uh real GDP and Russia with its GDP. the China's GDP and Russia's GDP does not include uh increase in rents, increase in interest and uh financial penalties, uh capital gains. It doesn't it's not financial in character. It's real in character. Uh the fight is between living in unreality in the short run or reality uh in the long term. How are you going to bring that about? For me, all I can do is say what I've just said uh to you today. If people understand this, at least that's step one in trying to accept the alternative that uh the empire is uh any country dominating another country is over. China is not would not be able to do it. No country is able to be uh an empire at the rest of the world's expense without the rest of the world pulling back and trying to create an alternative. Yeah, the lack of uh rationality these days is one of my main concerns. Uh because you do see foreign policy and economic policy being less and less dictated by national interest and reason. But um but this was the need to adjust is one of the reasons I was a bit optimistic about uh Trump's presidency because at least he talked about re-industrialization. At least he talked about the need for the US to have a different role. He challenged the uh the NATO expansionism which was a key manifestation of this hegemonic system. I mean it it looked as if he kind of if if didn't put words on it more or less intuitively recognized that the that you would have to let go of the empire in order to save the republic. So he it looked as if he was but of course he made a mess out of everything. And of course this attack on Iran now it's um yeah makes it even more so. Uh but uh yeah uh well before we wrap this up uh uh what what do you think uh if not the long term is going to happen now in the short term? You me mentioned that the United States attempts to raise interest rates to attract capital but instead you have capital flight. So how what what uh do you expect uh if not over the months to come the weeks to come? uh other countries are running for the exit and uh Trump's policies are driving them to the exit. Uh his tariff policy essentially uh threatens to deny them the US market if they don't agree to stop trading with China to uh refuse to ddollarize and essentially to surrender uh their economies to uh US directions. They're not going to do it. And the response by other countries uh is going to say well uh we're not going to accept your terms. Uh if you're going to raise the tariffs to 40% 60% do it. Uh of course we will uh what you're doing is stopping us from trading with the United States. We'll have tariffs against you and you go your way. We're going ours. So, uh, Trump himself is, uh, uh, if there were any plans of any, uh, plans, how do I break up the American empire? I would do just exactly what Donald Trump is doing. Uh, you drive other countries away. And you pro them to say, uh, you think there's no alternative. Uh, I'm going to be so aggressive towards you. Uh just as I'm aggressive towards Russia, toward China, towards uh Iran and and the Middle East, I also uh you uh I'm closing the US market to you. Uh the Trump has said that if you try to move your to uh to buy US uh b Treasury bonds uh yielding uh 4 a.5%, I'm going to charge a fee, a tariff fee on your buying bonds of 10%. So you'll actually lose uh money on uh the bonds and uh even if they the United States does pay the 4 a.5% the dollar will be falling against the euro. It's fallen 10% against the euro already. The euro was up to 120 before. Now it's back near parody. Uh other countries are losing uh in their own currency the valuation of the dollars they have. So u Trump is speeding the parting guess. He's closing off the US market to them and that means go it alone folks. Uh make your own uh agreement. And uh certainly there will be some uh despite the fact that the politicians of uh America's client countries uh uh Germany uh France and the United and Kingdom uh Britain are uh all uh basically uh uh voting against what their own populations vote for just as American Congress uh in wanting to press for war in Iran. is voting against what the opinion poll sold the Americans for. Uh th this cannot last. It has to be temporary or there will be a revolution. And u you have to remember that uh industrial capitalism itself uh in the 19th century was revolutionary. Uh in order for uh British uh industry to become competitive uh the industrialists had to end the power of the most powerful vested interests of their day, the real estate interests. They had to overcome the power of the House of Lords. They had to change the whole political system. They had to widen the vote to democratize politics. That was a revolution. This is the kind of revolution that uh is is recurring today in uh the global majority countries. Uh industry in Europe had to throw off the remnants of feudalism, the landlord class, the monopolies that had been created by uh international bankers to help kings pay the war debts uh that that they ran up. Uh well uh today the the these were all rontier interests land rent monopoly rent uh and uh interests this is the problem that the global south and global majorities uh are fighting. It's like the equivalent of what were the feudal interests that Europe overthrew to industrialize and become capitalist uh uh countries uh are today foreign interests. This foreign investors own their raw material rents, their natural resource rent, their land rent. Foreign investors own their major monopolies. And now that they've privatized uh public infrastructure uh into uh uh monopolies like temp's water in England uh and run them run these countries into uh foreign dollar debt so that they own interest. the the fight by other countries today to uh gain control of their own uh destiny, their own autonomy, their own sovereignty is ex very similar to the fight that Europe had against its own domestic uh interests that were carried over from feudalism. The world today uh is the rest of the world outside of the United States has to cope with the fact that uh we don't have feudalism anymore. But what we have is a superructure of rontier interests that are not part of the production economy. Uh it's we're back in the position of Adam Smith and John Stewart Mel and Mark saying uh there are two parts of the economy. There's the production economy and then there's the rontier economy the uh circulation economy finance industry real estate and monopolies. There has to be a way of thinking about what is gross national product. What is a product? Uh is is a product really all the money that the financial sector and the real estate uh sector makes in rents or is it what we actually produce like what China is producing without a rontier class. They the fight of dellorization is really in involves getting rid of the rontier class that these countries have and also uh rep uh they cannot afford to pay the foreign debt that they've run up. uh Trump's tariffs uh prevent other countries from uh earning enough export uh uh uh returns to earn the dollars to pay the bond holders and banks that have uh debts owed in US dollars. So there are going to be uh huge defaults uh that turn into a very conscious and deliberate debt repudiation of uh what are odious debts because all these debts that uh have been run up since 1945 as a result of a US uh sponsored uh philosophy of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank uh on uh uh essentially predatory pro- US lines uh have ended up uh not helping other countries pay but preventing them from pay. And if a creditor country uh will not let a debtor country pay by exporting enough in competition with its own industry, then there's no economic or moral uh uh claim that this uh foreign debt is a viable debt. It's unviable. So not only is the American empire unviable, but the whole superstructure of debt, the superructure of monopolies, the superructure of privatization and finan thatcherizing and reanizing the world economy is unviable. So we're dealing with a a real uh clash of economic systems. Uh some people call this a clash of civilization, but it's really a clash of economic systems. uh be and you could say it's between the promise of industrial capitalism as it was developing in it in the beginning in the 19th century and uh the disastrous reality of finance capitalism with a single geopolitical center in the United States run increasingly in its own interest in exploitative predatory fashion. Well, uh, Michael, thank you so much. And, uh, for anyone who wants to know more on, uh, the, yeah, the economic strategy for the American empire and also, uh, why this is collapsing, again, um, go to, uh, the description and, uh, look for the link to Michael Hudson's book, yeah, superimperialism. So, uh, thank you for, yeah, going through these important topics and, uh, yeah, hope to have you back on soon. Well, thank you for giving me a chance to explain my philosophy, Glenn.