Hi everyone and welcome back. We are joined again today by Professor Michael Hudson, excellent economist and a prolific writer uh to discuss uh this um trade agreement between the European Union and the United States uh whether or not this signifies uh further um subordination by the European Union. So yeah, welcome back to the program. >> Thanks. Good to be back, Glenn. Well, a key objective of the European Union uh for it to exist is to use collective bargaining power of the 27 member states to negotiate more favorable trade agreements. And a key motivation has been to have more symmetry in the relationship between the United States and Europe as uh two equal partners um the two pillars of the political west. Um again this has been the ambitions never really achieved. Yet in the recent agreement between the EU and the United States we saw that Vander Lion effectively capitulated completely that is the United States got everything and the EU got nothing. Uh the meeting even took place at Trump's golf course. Uh and uh uh this uh also took place not long after NATO Secretary General Mark Rut referred to Trump as daddy. And uh it seemed uh almost as a deliberate effort to display the relationship between the master and the vassel. Indeed, the prime minister of France even referred to it as a dark day for Europe and submission uh to the United States. Uh I was going to ask from a yeah an economic perspective, how do you make sense of this um trade agreement between the US and the EU? >> Well, first of all, the political setting for the agreement. You said that it was uh uh the member states that were negotiating. It wasn't the member states. It was one person. Uh Ursula Vonan, head of the uh European uh commission. One person. And her main objective is to fight the new cold war against Russia. and uh the New York Times in the United States, which is the uh right-wing spokesman for the deep state for the neocon interests, u summed up what was saying that whereas you say and every almost all the other newspapers say yes, it was a giveaway, it was one-sided, the New York Times quotes uh Maros Seov if I'm pronouncing his name right, the European Trade Commissioner uh said on Monday in Brussels, it's not about the trade, it's it's about geopolitical volatility. In other words, it's all about fighting with Russia. and Vonda uh of the EU Commission said that uh what this really was was locking the United States and Europe into the new cold war against Russia. Uh that all of this is part of uh basically fighting to the the equivalent of fighting to the last Ukrainian except in this case it's Europe fighting to the last bit of profitability for uh for what it's doing. Uh you could look at it as the Ukrainianization of of Europe. Trump has said to Europe, let's you and Russia fight and America is not going to pay the money for that. Uh basically Europe is going to pay the money and it'll pay it largely by buying American uh goods u American sorry let me fix America American products and uh uh the I'm sorry I had microphone problems and the the problem is that the EU has the countries have subordinated their economic interest that of their industry and also the interest of voters not to get involved in the Ukrainian war, subordinating it all to a very right-wing EU commission that is best viewed as a branch of NATO. And the this really is a NATO agreement rather than an agreement by all of the European countries. So looking from America, I don't know uh the extent to which other European countries may try to block uh the agreement. I think if there's a majority then it binds all of them. Uh that's awful. But also there's the idea of did Vonda make uh acting really all by herself? Did she make any attempt at all to bargain? Europe had a whole panel of of of supposed responses that it was going to do in case they turned down uh Trump's uh agreement and Trump imposed the tariff. Europe was going to begin uh subjecting American internet companies and the other companies to the minimum uh global tax. uh it was going to uh block uh US uh exports to Europe. It was going to essentially reorient its trade toward toward Russia presumably to get its gas from Russia instead of the United States. It was going to it didn't have to do any of this, but it just surrendered. And the question is why? And I've known I I think partly it's just the logic of uh uh of how how the Germans are known not for borrowing. And I had a uh some friends uh German friends, PhDs, professors going to a they were going to go to to Marrakesh and uh they wanted to buy presents and they wanted to buy some clothes in the Marrakesh market and uh the uh the whole idea of Arab markets is very much a strategy like Donald Trump's. They set a ridiculously high price uh for the customer. For the Arabs uh in the skulls, it's this is a game and they enjoy the game. And the way they play it, they'll set a very high price just to sort of uh give an an in terms of a high order of magnitude. And uh what happens then? They uh they expect the customer to bargain down. But the Germans didn't bargain down at all. They didn't know that what they're supposed to do is say, "No, that's a ridiculous price." And they offer maybe onetenth of the price. And then they try to say, "Well, we have alternatives." Uh there's a a usual bit. Well, somebody else is selling it cheaper. I can't pay more more to you. Look, they're over there. There's a whole uh bit of of negotiation. And uh I think um what I'm told is that a lot of the uh Arab uh stalls, you know, sort of expect the Europeans to feel that there's a victory if they can get them down to half of the ridiculous price that they've asked. And in reality, uh they were prepared to go all the way down to maybe 20% of what they'd asked. But the idea is well you have to give the buyer an idea that they've really got a deal. They've got you down in price from you know what you what uh the asking price. They think that somehow they've got you down to uh only a portion of what the uh ostensible price was when actually it was uh way above what the seller would have stopped would have settled for. Well, this is what Trump does. Uh basically, he sets a ridiculously high price. You may notice um a few days ago, earlier in the week, Trump said, "I'm giving President Putin 15 days to have a ceasefire in Ukraine so that the Germans and the French can all rearm Ukraine to reinforce their positions and give the missiles to shoot against Russia. Uh Russia has to agree to my agreement." Well, Russia simply ignored the whole thing and obviously it has uh It has no intention of surrendering to uh to Trump. They're just going their own way. U Vonda surrendered. There was really no hardly any attempt as far as I know from borrowing. And Trump had first talked about 30% tariff on European goods. Uh he got it all down to 15% uh tariff on European goods. And so Von delayan acts as if look I've got down to half price. Well, we're back in the Arab market of Trump style negotiation. And the fact is that America got Europe not to have any tariffs on any on US imports at all. It got to the zero. Europe could have had a much better deal in any negotiation just by saying, "Do you do you really want to force us into the arms of Russia?" If you're really closing off the American market to us, which is what you're threatening to do with your uh 30% tariffs and all of the special things that you're demanding that we uh spend 750 billion dollars on uh buying uh American goods and relocating uh our industry to the United States by uh investing in the United States, if uh if the price is pushing ourselves into depression. If the price is increasing our military spending from uh 2% of GDP to 5% of GDP, that extra 3% is the entire growth of GDP is going to be spent on supporting a milit America's military costs of fighting the cold war with Russia. Is Europe really willing to sacrifice all of its growth, which is not even as high as 3% these days? It's already being stifled into u maybe one and a half% uh without Germany showing negative growth. It's already sacrificing everything. Europe could have said, "Well, what you're doing by closing off the American market is really uh forcing us uh back to the pre2022 agreements when uh uh the 2022 uh Russian fight with Ukraine. We're going to have to rethink that. We're uh we we simply cannot afford to buy your highriced gas and uh liqufied natural gas if we also are unable to earn the dollars to buy this gas. Uh we can only earn enough to to buy from Russia. Well, none of that uh was on the on the table. They didn't call us bluff. And that's the amazing thing. Trump has said instead of negotiating my tariffs with the whole world and a big gut tariff conference through the World Trade Organization, I'm going to go country to country to country. I'm going to make everything bilateral and we're going to work with country. That way he gets to indulge his uh psychological uh pleasure of fighting with other countries. He loves to fight. For Trump, the whole idea of a presidency is to give him a chance to enter one fight after another after another, trying to be a winner every time. Uh, and that means making other countries the loser, not to achieve a mutual gain. Well, Germany could have done this, but that's not what Vondilan wants. It may be what some German industries want. It may be what French industries want. Uh it may be certainly what many voters in Europe want, but uh Vondan wanted to secure this uh new cold war against Russia. And as I said, when Trump said, "Let's you and Russia fight," that's exactly what Vondan wanted to do. So this really isn't an agreement by all of Europe. there was no uh group of European industrialists or European uh uh politicians uh just the European Parliament uh head the European Union. So it was uh uh this is not a democratic decision and it's not a decision that's made on the basis of economic self-interest or even what uh normal bargaining process would have been able to accomplish. Vond and the European generally a took Trump's uh ridiculous demands on Europe as if it was take it or leave it. Not well let's bargain them down and let's have a hard line. Let's really outline what the alternative European policy could be if we had to go it alone without the United States. And if Europe had to go it alone without the United States, it would have to reorient itself towards that part of the world, East Asia, Russia and East Asia that is growing instead of tying its economic links to yes, it's got the US market, but the US market is actually shrinking. The US market is not growing except for militaryindustrial uh products. the American consumer market uh is shrinking because uh it's already so heavily indebted. Uh consumers are that uh they're defaulting on their automobile loans, they're defaulting on their mortgages, they're defaulting on their bank credit card loans. Uh this is what the economy to which Europe is tied its fate to. And I think that's very self-destructive. But when you say that the EU could have had some leverage in this negotiations by threatening to go back to the Russian market if the American market is closed, they could also have threatened to link themselves closer to the Chinese market. And indeed, this is what many medium-sized powers are doing these days. They're diversifying their economic ties so they won't give too much um uh power in negotiations to to the leading state. Now this is often recognized as the opportunity in a multipolar world. That is that America isn't the only game in town. So it doesn't have that same leverage. Uh and this is why countries are diversifying. And again the key rule in geoeconomics is all countries want to have uh to manipulate the symmetry of interdependence. That is you want others to be more dependent on you and you diversify so you're less dependent on others. And this is how you extract political power. Now this is why diversifying ties is so important, diversifying economic connectivity. But uh but we see the Europeans they kind of undermined their own position because they cut themselves off from Russia increasingly from China and when the Americans put the sanctions back on Iran they you know the Europeans follow along. The main problem is the Europeans seem to cut themselves off from other centers of power and uh and the assumption has been if we just prioritize America on everything then we show our loyalty or obedience then we will be rewarded. America will then see us as a true friend because this is you know the mentality that you know it's not about interest it's about friendship. Uh the problem is when you cut yourself from all centers of power, only link yourself to the US, uh you don't have any hand to play. You can't negotiate. You can't say we're going to go to the Russians when the Europeans are foaming at the mouth every time they speak about Russia. It's I mean, they cut themselves down in size. And uh and making matters worse, I think as the United States is uh when you're in a war as we are now against Russia, uh you become very dependent on the security reassurances or security guarantees of the United States and the US again in geoeconomics, you want to convert the security dependence into political and economic loyalties and America's cashing in on it now. I mean as you said and also as the trade commissioner from the EU confirms this is not only about economics we sign horrible trade agreements so America will stay in Europe and ideally continue this war against Russia it's uh it's um is this has this become a war to the last euro as well >> but this idea of uh security with the United States is a fantasy Glenn uh the uh President Putin has already said that uh if Germany sends its missiles to Ukraine, long-distance missiles able to hit Moscow or even easier St. Petersburg or other Russian territories, the that Russia is going to retaliate not simply against Ukraine, but they realize this is a war with Europe. Uh Ukraine is only a battlefield in it. We will go against the country that supplies the missiles. We will bomb Germany. And if it's an English uh British missile, we will bomb Britain. We'll bomb France. The United States is not going to go to war with Russia and uh risk an atomic war if Russia bombs Germany. It'll only do that if Russia bombs US forces or the United States itself. I don't know what the United States even would do if Russia bombs the uh the US army base uh in Germany, but uh Russia without using atomic bombs can already use its missiles to blow up um the main Germany's main military uh uh arms producers. It it can uh blow it can do to Germany what it's done to Ukraine. the United States wouldn't do anything. And u I think Trump has already said well they're on their own. He's dissoci dissociated himself. Um in Washington there is a phrase among politicians if you want friends in Washington get a dog. Well uh international diplomacy isn't about national friendship. Uh I know that uh America is uh that Russia followed that policy. the Soviet Union did uh for many years after World War II. It spent almost uh bankrupted itself building the S1 dam in Egypt. It spent an enormous amount of money thinking this will make friendship. But it it didn't buy it control of Egypt at all. It thought that it was getting friendship with Israel because so many uh Russian uh Jews immigrated to to Israel. that didn't uh help at all. Nations don't have friends, they have interests. So, the idea of friendship really meant is it a military treaty commitment? Well, there's no u uh NATO uh does is not really a treaty committing the United States to support Europe. If Europe uh or Germany on its own supplies missiles to attack Russia and Russia retaliates, this is not uh a defense uh uh action. It uh Germany is to be the aggressors. very important to realize that uh uh merits in Germany, von Derlin and the EU commission uh want Germany to fight against Russia specifically and the cost uh I think President Putin has already said uh they tried that in World War II. They tried that in World War I. Look what happened to them. Do they really want that to happen again? Well, this immediately has led the European press to make an absolutely silly cover story. And I can't believe that uh the European voters take this seriously. The uh the uh pro-war uh neocons in Europe saying, "Well, Russia may invade us again. We have to defend oursel against a Russian invasion." An invasion of Europe would take 20 million men of whom maybe 10 million would die. There's no conceivable way in which uh President Putin uh would would do do that. No leader of any country that has the support of its population can wage a land a land war against another country. Uh in today's world, wars are not fought by infantries invading. This is uh uh 50 uh 75 years out of date. Wars are fought by bombs. It's the only kind of war that a democratic country can afford. Uh because no country is will be able to impose a military draft uh forcing draft. Germany is is trying to recruit an army, but it's not a draft. You'd have uh what happened in Europe, exactly what happened in America in the Vietnam War. The students protested the war because they didn't want to be drafted and die in Vietnam. I don't think any European uh uh population uh would would stand for a military draft for a war that's completely unnecessary. uh there's no economic or political reason to attack Russia except for the fact that Vondan and let's quite frankly the the resurgent German Nazi movement wants to break up Russia in conjunction with the United States to do to Russia what uh the United States neocons did to it the Soviet Union in the 1990s to break it up into parts to privatize its uh industry and its natural resources, its gas and its oil and its nickels all over again, but this time with greater German, French and European participation that occurred in the 1990s. This is a pipe dream. Uh and there there's no way in which uh Russia would let itself be broken up into the the parts that the US scenario has been handed over to Europe is saying, well, you know, we can all break up Russia. We can we can once again have Europe have Western Europe conquer Russia as uh we've been trying to do ever since the Crusades, you know, moving moving eastward. Uh and we can America's holding out this last hope of a military confrontation with Russia and as you just said with China. Uh the what capped all of this uh discussion is when Vonda came out and said well the one thing uh on Sunday at the meeting the last thing she said well what we've now settled at is stability and dependability. Well that's crazy. No uh because uh Trump there's no stability with any agreement that President Trump makes. he can change the agreements uh and does so at will. Suppose that um uh Germany or Europe now begins to uh import uh more Chinese electric vehicles and Chinese cars u and begins to trade with China. Suppose it would even begin exporting chip engraving uh equipment from Holland. Well, the uh the uh Trump can say, "Well, you've violated the agreement. Part of the agreement that we've made uh it may not be written down on paper, but uh Russia uh the the European Union was to join our fight not only against Russia, but NATO is now no longer uh an Atlantic organization. It's a Pacific organization. the big fight of Europe is going to be in the China straits uh between uh China and Taiwan. Well, what on earth? Why would uh uh Europe have any interest in uh trying to fight against the uh the equivalent of Hong of Hong Kong to prevent the symbiosis between Taiwan and China that it's been uh developing by mutual uh investment for the last uh uh few decades. This is this is a fantasy. How how could the European voters be and and media be persuaded that somehow fighting against the enormously growing China market, the uh Chinese technology, Chinese uh underpricing of ability to produce much less expensively than the US economy? How can they believe that NATO should get involved in a fight between China and Taiwan? Uh, not to mention Russia. This this is what doesn't make any sense from any materialist approach at all. And I I don't understand why the there must be some European politicians that have been able to gain office without uh uh the blessing on promotion of the United States and its non-governmental organizations and its subsidies and its outright bribery. Well, I guess what you're seeing already is a nationalistic uh reaction against all this. uh if there's a nationalistic reaction but no elections yet, we're we're in a kind of interim between the current uh governments that are in power, Macron and France. Can he will he be voted out of off his party be voted out of office by the right-wing in the next election? Same thing in Germany. Will the alternative for Deutseland and other uh parties take over? Same thing in in England. We're we're in a state of affair, an inter interregnance where the governments in power and the subordination of national governments to one person in the European Union, Vondan with her Nazi background is and pro-war proclivities and desire for a uh for military war with Russia along with merits in Germany where uh somehow they're in charge of committing Europe to a policy that is not in Europe's interest, not supported by most voters, uh, and, uh, is is leading to a political upheaval. So, one of the upshots of this may really be, is this the straw that broke the camel's back? is is is this agreement with Trump the uh the lever that has finally said the European Union as it's structured now is uh is a uh subordinating its interest to uh to NATO the US defense defense department the US state department and to the pro-war neocons is this really uh the road on which European countries want to go or are willing to go. What can Europe do? You you tell me since you're in Europe. What can Europe do to uh to avert this fate? >> Well, first uh yeah, let me just say that um this idea that you have permanent allies. I think the language is part of the problem we have in Europe because we keep referring to allies and friends assuming that the interests are identical. And I guess key part of the problem is that all interests these days are framed as values. So and that kind of brushes over the different interests of the states. So by subordinating foreign policy completely to the United States, uh it's assumed that somehow we will still be, you know, we're in the same camp, we have the same interest. Uh I think some of this is leftover a bit from the again since World War II because in the bipolar world of the cold war everything was either us or them. So it was um interests were more aligned simply because there's only two centers and under the unipolar order I think the goal of pursuing a collective hedgemon also aligned the interest. But I don't think the Europeans are prepared or understand what the multipolar distribution of power entails because the interest will be much more diverse now. And uh and uh the the US will not have focus on Europe. The Europeans uh can only have certain negotiation power with the US again if they also have alternatives. So they don't have to accept whatever they put on the table. Uh it reminds me of um yeah the British prime minister Lord Palmerston who said that we have no permanent allies. We have no permanent enemies. Uh we only have permanent interests. And I think this is a truth which has been concealed over the alliance systems we had after World War II. But it's all coming apart. And uh I think the Europeans have to learn again to speak in the language of interest and finding how to harmonize interest. uh because it's it's just brushed over. But uh um but the thing is for the Europeans now it is in their interest to end the war in Ukraine because if you end the war then um there won't be this huge security dependence which the United States can use to extract these unfavorable trade agreements. Uh we would also then have the ability to diversify our trade to a greater extent and um uh but but none of this is being done. So if you say again the what our interest is national interest es es especially for Germany is to link its economy closer to Russia. But you're not allowed to say this because then you're pro-Russian. Uh you know it's not pro-German, it's pro-Russian. So it's this very simplistic propagandistic way of looking at the world. And I think the Indians are also concerned that they might go down this road because Trump now is going to punish India because India trades with Iran, they get punished. They trade with Russia, they get punished. And uh of course the same will be applied if they trade with China. So the logic is if you don't want to be punished by America, you have to cut yourself off all these other centers of power. And but at the end of the day, they're not going to be rewarded for this. No, they're going to have only one partner, the United States. US will hold all the cards and the US can extract whatever trade deals or political concessions they want from the Indians. So they will become subordinated like the Europeans. This is why it's important to you know not fall into this trap. But it does appear the Europeans have though and uh it's um yeah it's very disappointing to watch because the point of departure is never what is pro what is good for Germany, what is good for France. is always uh you know are you pro-Russian or against Russia and uh you're not allowed to be pro-Russian. So so kind of there is no debate I think and uh but as you said when you don't pursue national interest a huge opposition will begin to emerge and uh I think the efforts to marginalized the position this can only be done for so long before political stability begins to unravel. Well, this is uh this alignment of interest is has nothing to do with the kind of world that the United States said it was uh introducing in 1945. Uh there was supposed to be an equality of nations and the idea was that there was really a convergence of interests between the United States. What Trump has said is the exact opposite. He uh he said uh in terms of interests, any negotiation I make with another country, America has to win. There's winners and losers. For Trump, it's a zero someum game. And he says, uh we're going to win in any deal. and he presents any deal that he makes whether with uh England with uh with uh Europe or uh Israel or other countries that America has won and come out uh the the victor. That's how he views diplomacy as a fight between who's going to win, who's going to lose and uh he's a bully. These are not the rules that uh Europe thought that it was signing on to in uh 1945. And in 1945 uh the these rules were very US in the sense of uh Europe had to open its markets to US goods. It couldn't protect its industry to rebuild it. And the uh dress rehearsal for the agreements that the United States made with Europe in 1945 uh were uh America first went to went to uh Britain and it negotiated uh the whole the whole became the whole future with Britain with the British loan uh with the uh IMF loan with it it got Britain to agree to this structure. of world trade and investment. And once it achieved this uh control over Britain, uh it then faced continental Europe with a fet plate. It said, "Okay, Britain's done it. Here's the situation." Um and Europe went along with it. Well, fast forward to the last few months. The first trade deal that uh President Trump made was with Britain and it called for uh 10% tariff on uh British goods. Well, that uh shock uh if you go back and read the European press uh at the time, they said, "Well, we can certainly do much better than the deal that America's made with Britain." Britain always knuckles under to what the United States asks it to do, but we're we're Europe. Uh we don't have to uh agree to the same uh thing that uh England has done, Britain. But that what's happened is that the deal that Trump has made with the European uh union or with Miss Vanderlayan I should say uh speaking for it is much worse than the deal with uh that it made uh with Britain. Uh the tariffs on European goods were two two and a half%. This is multiplied six-fold. 600% increase in the tariff rates. This is uh uh a giant quantum leap. The the amount of exports uh US exports that uh to Europe that Europe's agreed to take are four times as large as the current national gas uh exports. uh the nobody can figure out when you do the math how can Europe afford to uh spend this uh much money on uh importing more natural gas there's not even the court the port capacity to do that how how on earth uh can it do all of this and for European investment in the United States what's going to happen are uh is the German auto industry going to offshore its production and move out of Germany and set up uh affiliates in the United States. That's not possible because if uh the continental Europe or Japan or any other country relocates into the United States, it's going to be subject to America's 50% tariff on aluminum, on steel, uh and other products. This is going to make American industry so highpriced. Uh yesterday uh steel prices already began to go up in the United States as a result of the uh steel tariffs. Uh the uh the America Trump's policies have made American industry even more uncompetitive with that of Europe, China, Japan, other countries uh than it was before. So there's no economic rationale for individual companies to say okay we're going to move out of Europe we're going to downsize to the United States. If there is has been any movement by uh German car companies or French industry it's been to China and Asia. That's where the growth is. That's where the technology is. That's where the markets are. that's where the increase in markets are. Uh not in the United States where the markets are going going to be shrinking. Uh it it it just doesn't make sense. And as Trump says, we're going to lower the value of the exchange rate of the US dollar by lowering interest rates already down 12% visav the euro. That means that uh European investors, European parent companies that have established uh affiliates in the United States uh in as measured in euros, their capital investment has lost 12%. That's far exceeds uh any profits that they could have made in the United States. and the profits are not being made uh re really at all here because of the conditions of the US economy. So the whole structure that is envisioned by the European agreements or surrender or capitulation with the United States are economically unachievable in practice. And you'd think that that would make the whole set of agreements unsustainable in political practice. How long can political arrangements be uh con constrained with so much economic deformity of these arrangements? I don't see how it can be. And it u you can see the effect of Trump's changing the rules with what's happened in Japan. Uh a few weeks ago, Trump made an agreement with Japan saying, "All right, okay, we're going to give your automobile exporters at least an advantage over European exporters, if not over US producers. uh we're going to impose a 15% tariff on Japanese goods, automobiles, uh computers, etc. But, uh look, uh Europe, uh we're charging Europe 25 or 30% on uh tariffs. So, you're going to have an advantage over European automobiles. And people are not going to buy uh Volkswagens or BMWs or Porsche, they're going to buy Japanese cars. Well, now with the uh agreement that he's just made uh 15% tariffs on Europe, u Japan no longer has the advantage that it was promised just two weeks ago. What's going to happen in Japan? you're having all of these international agreements not only between the United States and Europe, but between the United States and other uh uh bilateral uh countries that it's negotiated with uh being threat threatened by all this and everything is in a state of flux. There is no stability at all. And yet this is being sold by Miss Vanderlayan to uh the Europeans is now we have stability and dependability and at least we uh we know the kind of in uh market and environment that we're operating in. Well, she doesn't have a clue. Nobody has a clue because that's how Trump operates. Uh so again, we're living in very largely a fantasy world. How long can the current state of affairs uh remain without falling apart? Fantasy world is there and the right word for it. Uh it it did I did think a bit about the comparison as well with this um the 5% Europeans will now spend on uh American well on on weapons. Um that is the deal under NATO. It reminds me of the you know the Soviet joke that you you pretend to work we pretend to pay because it's a dishonesty from um from from both sides that is for the Europeans they're not really going to pay 5% they they can't they don't have the money some might try but mostly they will just cook the books you know put some infrastructure projects in there or just give future promises which they won't hold. So they get to pretend to Trump they're going to increase it and Trump gets to pretend to the American public that the Europeans are now paying for their own security. And um but at the end of the day it looks like this. If the Europeans pay for their own security this gives uh the Americans a reason to reduce their presence in Europe while the Europeans think that if they pay more on security they're going to get the the reward or you know the thanks from America which that they will keep staying in Europe. So they keep uh yeah lying to each other and to themselves but at the end of the day it's resulting in very different objectives. But um on the topic though of of militarization and increasing it uh part of this deal was also this foreign investments in the United States and also the promise to buy more American weapons. Now, this uh German goal of becoming the greatest military power in Europe, uh a crazy goal by the way, but uh part of the idea was not just military power. They wanted this as a source of industrialization a bit like they had on their Hitler that this um armament would uh be important component of developing key industries. But as Germany aims to return to this military caninianism, we it begs the question, what if if the weapons are to be bought by the Americans, does this mean that uh the the dream of building a powerful military base production facilities in Europe is going to suffer? >> Well, you talked about cooking the books and I've read reports of what they're going to do. One way of cooking the books is for the Europeans to say, "Well, what is national?" Yes, we've agreed to spend 5% on national security, but what is national security? Global warming is certainly an issue of national security. Uh, and so we're going to include the global warming budget in that. But if Europe cares about global warming, look at what the United States is doing. It's uh uh the fighting that US has done militarily uh contributes as much to global warming as it's as if the US army the US military was the 29th largest country in the world contributing to global warming. It's it's uh it's the global warmer. Trump has pulled the America out of all of the uh global warming agreements and he's abolished all of the the regulations against uh pollution by the coal burning utilities in the United States. He's the anti- environmentalist uh president. But in regarding the uh the what is spent on uh US military arms, they don't work. Is there any discussion in the European press that the uh the American pro uh missile protection in Ukraine doesn't work? The Russian missiles go right through the American protections doesn't work. The Patriot missiles don't protect uh uh Ukraine from Russian attack. the uh you can the military blogs and the military reports not only from Russia but from Ukraine itself say that they're complete they're defenseless with the American weapons uh to to fight the tank uh the the strategy is still based on tanks uh German tanks American tanks the the tanks have basically they've all been blown blown up by drones. And in today's warfare where the new weapon that has been introduced are drones, drones knock out tanks. Tanks are no longer the way to um uh to fight militarily. But that's what the military spending is supposed to be on. Tanks that don't work, missile protections that don't work, Patriot missiles that don't work. uh what is the point of spending money on the military defense that is not successful in defending uh the country? Europe is letting Europe may indeed uh send a missile, a German missile to Ukraine to send against Russia. And when Russia retaliates against Germany, it will have no means of protecting itself from Russia's supersonic missiles that can get through any defense that NATO has now uh erected there. So Europe is in no position to to engage in a fight with Russia. It's it'll be like Bambi meets Goliath as we say in the United States. It'll be kaboom. Don't the Europeans understand that? Oh, seemingly not. It's um well, if you go through the media of any German, Scandinavian, French, British newspaper, you see the here the the language has been um very much simplified and dumbed down. So it's but uh again I think there's a reason why there's a bit of a political crisis and as the economic problems will begin to pile up. Uh it will create more more political problems because you can only live so long in fantasy world before reality catches up with you. Um, but that kind of takes me to my last question though is what do you see well to what extent do you see the European Union being able to sustain itself under this current path? I mean the this looks as if it's going to intensify the the industrialization and uh once the EU really shows that it's not able to deliver on on deliver benefits but instead becomes a liability. Um yeah one wants to ask where where wonderline will get our powers from. Uh so for example when the Germans oh just when the Germans went to China for example to try to negotiate some good trade deals the European the EU comes along and uh while the Germans wanted to get some trade deals the the EU bureaucrats stand there and uh you know issue threats and uh try to lecture the Chinese. So it's uh um yeah one has to ask do you think the EU will survive this? I don't see how the European Union as it's organized now can survive. The way it was organized was to tie it in to NATO, to commit it to NATO. And so the whole politics of the European Union and hence the uh economic organization uh has all been uh dictated uh by by NATO and that's really the key the this uh subordination of Europe uh to the United States. I don't I don't see how long Europe can subordinate its the interests of its industrial companies, its uh economy, its populations to u to the United States and especially if when the the first bombs begin to fall on uh on Germany when Russia bombs the factories that are making the missiles or the tanks or the other uh German armaments. Uh and America says, "Well, you know, you you really shouldn't uh do that. I'm really angry at Mr. Putin for doing that, but uh that's it. We're not going to go to war with Russia uh over this. It was Germany that dropped the bomb, dropped the missile. I don't see how Europe can survive, especially if they look at other countries. Even little Canada has stood up to the United States. Mexico has stood up to the United States. Brazil has stood up to the United States. Uh Europe has succumbed and to the United States more than any other part of the world. There must be some uh media coverage of how other countries have been able to re uh realign their trade. Brazil has said, "All right, we've lost the US market. We're going to adjust." China has adjusted. It hasn't uh it no longer imports soybeans from the United States. It it no longer it's drastically cut its uh trade with the United States and is trading with other countries. Uh the same thing for Brazil. Mexico is decided, all right, we can't export and trade with the United States anymore. We're reorienting our economy towards China. China's investing in building new ports uh in Mexico. So for us to uh be begin to relink there, there's no no longer the Monroe Doctrine connecting subordinating us to the United States. Same thing in in Canada. So uh there must be some uh media coverage in Europe of how other countries are coping with uh Trump's bullying and realizing that it doesn't have to be the way that Bondan uh outlined things. Well, tomorrow uh on August 1st, there's supposed to be the written version of the meetings and uh so far every uh uh negotiation that Trump has made with other countries. The US version of the documents is very different from the version that his counterparties have written up. uh there's a uh the there seems to be a misunderstanding or else whatever Trump has verbally promised these countries is very much like what America promised uh Gorbachev uh and Russia before 1990. NATO is not going to move one inch to the to the east. Uh America doesn't keep its word. Uh Trump made his billions of dollars by the art of breaking the deal. That's how he negotiates. That's how America has uh negotiated for the last 250 years. Ever since independence, ever since its uh uh its uh treaties that it's made with the Native American tribes uh for their land, it doesn't uh it's willing to break deals. Uh so we're back to the uh German uh B tourists in Marrakesh. They they don't real there there's something that makes them hesitate to negotiate and uh in the spirit of uh the American bullies. I don't know. Do you explain that in terms of national character, psychology, or the fact that Europe really uh is run by neo-Nazis wanting a new cold war with Russia? As Putin and Lavrov has said, they said, "This is not Europe negotiating. This is the old the dream of the Nazi party." And as Merch said, uh we're going to rebuild the Vermat this time. And Putin has said, "Well, what happened to the Vermat last time? Is this really what Europe is going to?" Yes, it is. And uh this is uh the red line. The the red line for Russia is German missiles uh in the Ukraine battlefield. Meaning this is now a war of NATO against Russia. It's not Ukraine against Russia. is not uh it's not the European Union, Germany, France and and Britain backing Ukraine. It's fighting Russia. Ukraine is only a a battlefield where this fight between NATO and Ukraine is occurring with the United States. And Trump says, "Well, uh we're I I'm not going to be actively involved in NATO anymore. I'm focusing on the fight with China, uh is our number one rival." That's that's the real context that any agreement should be framed in terms of. Yeah. I think I think why Europe Europe is unique is because of the partnership they've had with the US for the past 80 years. Uh because Europe really only had some cohesion under American dominance that is as a you know the often referred to as the pacifier. So if um if the US leads then the British, French, Germans they won't compete have this security competition or even compete for leadership in Europe. So it had this yeah mitigating effect which made it possible to um yeah to brush tensions aside and uh I think there's simply no other political imagination how to organize Europe outside of the American pacifier. So when the world now changes, the US signals it has going to have uh its priorities in other parts of the world. Uh I think it's just they engage in wishful thinking a bit of bunker mentality hoping that uh you know if you return a little bit to cold war America will see the value of staying here. This is why you have people like Kala saying, "Oh, if you cannot defeat the Russians, how can we defeat the Chinese, you have to defeat, you know, so they really doing everything they can to tie the Americans into Europe." And uh uh also if if America uh if they don't have America, then they're going to have to reconsider their entire relationship with Russia. Because once the Cold War came to an end, we had a we made a choice. We said, you know, never mind this Gorbachov's common European home. Let's create a Europe without Russia. Uh where the largest country in Europe that is terms of population, territory, military, economy should be the only country that doesn't have a seat at the table. You can only sustain this uh model if you have um a collective hedgeimon in Europe. That is a powerful United States that's willing to do its part to marginalize and weaken Russia. So um but again all of this is falling apart and uh but instead of addressing the core of the problem in taking the point of departure how to enhance our own interest uh everything is just colored in the censored in the language of values well you know it's liberal hedgeimmony so it's you know our liberal democracy and Russian authoritarianism we have to fight them otherwise we will be engulfed in chaos so it's uh it's really strange strange times in Europe, the media is gone beyond absurd. Uh and u I think as you see now the economic problems and then this translates into political instability and this new alternatives emerging. It's going to be yeah a lot more authoritarianism as well because they're not going to allow the alternatives to emerge. I think you saw this in France with what they did to Le Pen. In Germany they're going to maybe ban the main opposition party. It's uh yeah across the board it's yeah what happened in Romania uh it's going to be very hard to um to the political opposition once the political establishment begins to crumble. So, it's um not good times for Europe. And at the same time, of course, the Germans are casually talking about nuclear weapons having the largest army in Europe. And u all of this is premised on the idea that well, they're not like in the past. They've changed. It's it's kind of not end well, I think. But, um anyways, any final thoughts before we wrap this up? >> No, you've summed it up. >> It's it's chaos. And I I don't know uh there's no way of forecasting what's going to happen. Uh you're right, the vested interests have such control over the media uh and over the existing parties in power and the ability to block uh any democratic attempt to vote for an alternative as in occurred in Romania and as the Europeans are trying to uh isolate Hungary uh and other uh countries that may not go along. uh this it this is not democracy anymore. This is nothing to do with the kind of world that was promised in 1945. It's the reversal of world and it of that world. And it's uh as if we were to take Putin seriously, it's the revival of Nazism and the Russian press says, "Well, we're not going to lose 22 million people again. Uh we're going to end this very quickly if there's any attack on us. >> As the rishnik have gone into mass production, it's uh I don't think the Europeans know I think they're overestimating how far they can push Russia before Russia decides to take decisive actions. But uh again in Europe recognizing this is considered to be pro-Russian. So we can't have the conversation to begin with. So >> yep, that's it. >> Anyway, thank you so much for letting me pick your brain. It's uh yeah, it's that the economic dimension of this I think is also going to be of growing importance as the EU undermines its own economies and industries. So yeah, thanks again. >> Thanks for having me, Glenn.