Welcome back. Today we are joined by
Professor Richard Wolf uh to discuss the
future of the west, NATO, Europe and uh
also the international economic system
in its current state which is uh perhaps
too ambitious for a 40 45 minute long
podcast but uh let's see how long or how
far we get into this. So thank you for
coming on and um I uh yeah I wanted to
discuss with you what's happening within
the west because I guess my my my simple
perspective is that uh the political
west as one entity has seen it um you
know it it relied on specific conditions
both security and economic that is after
World War II the Americans provided the
Europeans with very generous trade
agreements and security because it had
the capabilities to do so and also O
because of the rivalry with the Soviet
Union after the cold war we saw the
United States pursuing a hegemonic world
order and the partnership with the
Europeans through NATO expansion was an
important node in this system. Now in
the current multipolar system we see
something very different. The US has
exhausted itself. It's less capable of
competing with big powers like China and
it more or less needs to reshuffle the
deck to gain some well let's say
strategic advantage. So we see the US
going a little bit rogue. Meanwhile,
Europe is seen now as a cost a burden
and the US essentially must seek a
greater return on investment for its
empire. Thus you see a very
transactional and extractive approach
towards his allies which isn't limited
to Trump by the way. Uh well I and all
of this also
we spoke earlier and uh it does surprise
me as well how Europe seems to be
disintegrating very fast. So I I was
wondering do you see it in a similar way
or what is happening at the moment to
the west because every week is more
absurd than the previous.
Okay, I do have a very strong set of
views that I have worked on for many
many years. Um, my perspective is
American. I'm sitting here in New York
City. Uh, this is what I study. I was
born and lived and worked all my life
here in the United States. Uh, on the
other hand, I am also European. My
mother was born in Berlin, Germany, and
my father in Mets, France. I've spoken
French and German all my life. Um, I've
I'm interested in that. I have family in
Europe. So, in a sense, I've been
coincidentally
pretty well placed to to feel uh what's
going on. And finally, I'm I'm very
historical.
For me the way to understand
[clears throat] the present is in the
framework of the passage of time of of
historical change. So with that in mind,
let me tell you what I think is going
on.
The most important phenomena is not Mr.
Trump or the United States or going
rogue. All of which I understand the the
the value of of those ideas.
But I think to overstate it, but to make
my point, the real problem here is
China. And it has to be understood that
China is changing everything. And what
you have is a West that was not prepared
for, could not imagine, and is at a loss
for how to deal with the rise of China
where everything that has been tried to
stop it, to slow it has failed
with no prospect of anything in the
future being any more successful than it
has in in at least the last 75 years of
uh western history.
That's the first point. Here's the
second point.
The United States
was, as you correctly said, caught up in
the great cold war with the Soviet
Union.
It had hoped in the 19th century to be
the great replacement of the British
Empire.
It had competed with Germany for that
role. And in World War I,
the United States and its ally, then
Britain, having defeated the two efforts
of Britain to prevent the American
colony from becoming an independent
force, the the 1775 war and then again
the 1812 war. Having failed, US UK
smashed Germany as an alternative.
That gave the United States
the kind of opening to become the
dominant global power in the rest of the
20th century. World War II cemented that
relationship basically by destroying
Japan which had pretensions of perhaps
shaking up the Anglo-American
domination.
But the Second World War conveniently
removed Japan, conveniently decimated
what was left of Europe as a competitor,
leaving only awkwardly the Soviet Union.
And so the Cold War was the recognition
there was, and I'm exaggerating, but I
want to make the point. There was one
more enemy to overcome. You You had
subordinated the British Empire. You had
subordinated Europe. You had
subordinated
Japan. Literally
with the atomic bomb at the end, a kind
of subordination
taken to the nth degree.
So that left the Soviet Union and you
entered into a cold war
bitterly. You had to recognize that you
couldn't obliterate the Soviet Union
because they had nuclear weapons. And
then the Soviet Union conveniently
implodes on itself in 1989, 1990, 1991.
And here now comes the point. It led the
United States, the leadership of its
political community, the heads of the
Republican and Democratic Party.
It led them to what's very important a
hysterical
as well as historical moment. It was the
moment that Mr. Amir Shimemer, whom I
know you know very well, has dedicated
his life to understanding as the uniolar
moment, a period in which the United
States could plausibly imagine
the fantasy
of manifest destiny that somehow God and
remember God is important in the United
States. No doubt lives here. uh
celebrating the United States as the
great hegeimon of the world. And with
the collapse of the Soviet Union, we
were to inherit the whole world.
It would be our oyster.
the neoliberal globalization program
that had gotten underway in the 1970s
could really take off in the 1990s and
ear and and really move production out
of the United States. All the dirt of
manufacturing would be done in Asia and
Latin America and Africa eventually and
the United States would reign supreme.
Ironically, the explosions
of a Muslim reaction of a reaction of
the so-called era of terrorism in a
peculiar way reinforced this idea. The
West was where things were civilized and
polite and appropriate. And then the
east was not only where dirty production
was taking place, but where people were
irrational,
backward ideological, all of it. It just
And now comes the the disaster.
The dust clears. We're now in the teens
of this new century.
and it emerges
that there is yet another obstacle.
It's not Europe. It's not America. It's
not the Soviet Union. It's not Russia.
It's not Japan.
It's China.
Only it's a much faster growing economic
powerhouse than any of the others had
ever been.
And so instead of your being able to
collect all of the fruits you had
promised yourself, you were denied.
And everything you've tried to do to
China, everything
has failed. They don't slow down. This
year they will be two to three times
faster growth of their GDP than that of
the United States. And that's been the
norm for 30 years. Nothing has stopped
it. Not the seventh fleet, not the noise
about Taiwan, not the economic
agreement, none of it. Pacific
Partnership, Azion, make no difference.
That does not stop the relative decline
of the United States and Europe and the
rise of China and now China with the
bricks. Uh it's overwhelming and there's
no end in sight. And I think that has
produced a kind of
hysterical reaction now. At first fear,
at first bitterness, at first resolve to
do to the Chinese what seemed to have
worked against the Soviets,
but it doesn't work. China isn't the
Soviet Union. Very important ways
economically, politically, and
everything else.
And so there's hysteria. And the
hysteria reaches its apogee
in a very peculiar way. It produces in
the United States a clown as president.
A clown whose humor whose bizarness
really is a reaction to everything I've
just said. He is going to break all the
rules. He is going to behave in all the
ways you're not supposed to. He is
willing to ask and answer questions that
were out of the realm of allowable
political discourse in this country.
Are Mexico and Canada important allies?
Not particularly. If we can squeeze some
tribute out of them in the short run,
that's all they're good for.
And if we have to use our military,
fine. We have enough military and they
are weak enough. We can do that. And the
same applies to Western Europe.
We gave them military protection because
we needed a buffer with the Soviet
Union. We don't need that anymore. The
Soviet Union isn't
the kind of threat we once thought it
was.
In fact, our better bet would be to try
to pull them away from China, which none
nothing we've done so far has been able
to do, but we should try to do that. And
a good compromise in Ukraine would help
solve that problem. And that's why we're
going to pull out of Ukraine. We'll
leave the Europeans who we know can't do
it on their own. They haven't military
capability. They haven't had it for 50
years. It's silly. The Russians have no
reason to go and the Europeans couldn't
defend themselves anyway. So, let's
convert them into a short-term benefit.
Let's go to Vanderlayan and say, "Here's
the deal. We're going to hit you with
terrible tariffs. If you don't want
terrible tariffs, we're willing to give
you moderate tariffs, but only if you
commit to do two interesting things.
buy our liqufied natural gas, 700
billion dollars over the next 10 years
and contribute another seven or 800
billion in in guaranteed promised
investments in the United States. That
is, we want you politicians in Europe to
go to your people to take the money you
generate in your economy, deprive your
own country of reinvesting it, and put
it instead in our economy, and we will
tell you where and how and when to put
it.
That they that that's a serious
proposition is what matters.
That Vanderlayan went for it tells you
how bad it is. how how horrible the
subordination of Europe is that is
contemplated here because the chaos in
Europe that that could produce as you
desperately try to hold on to your
social welfare when what we've just what
you've just agreed to precludes it there
is no way you can do what you promised
Mr. Trump
and reharm against you Russia and hold
on to your social safety net.
Five minutes of arithmetic will show you
you can't do that. So the United States
is saying we don't I'm going to
exaggerate now, but we don't care about
the long run.
We don't know what's going to happen in
the long run. Time is on China's side,
not ours. We've learned that over the
last 30 years. We need a shortterm
fix.
And for that, we need to drain
our empire, our informal global empire,
the richest parts of which are the other
members of the G7.
And we're going to drain them dry.
Europe, Canada, Japan, and Mexico. We're
going to drain them all.
And we're going to use that to make one
last profound effort to stop the
phenomena of China and the bricks, which
is what's going on. And here's the
irony.
There is a residue. And here I would
like your
response. Correct me where I'm wrong.
There is a worry.
And the worry is Europe.
There is an outside chance in the
American mentality that the Europeans
could be so insulted, so outraged
by what is being done to them that they
will actually
overcome their nationalistic inability
to unify
which has been on display now for so
many years. It's hard to imagine.
Everybody doesn't see it for what it is.
There is however a risk that you will be
so destructive of what their future is
that you will actually bring them
together.
And then there's a danger they will want
a place in the world economy.
They don't want Russia, China. They
don't want the United States. They want
their own.
And how are they going to do that? Well,
here's the irony.
One of the things they need
is a place to develop energy, to develop
rare earths, and to develop a whole new
economic
support.
And so the conclusion was reached, I
believe, in Washington,
that the danger to Greenland was never
China or Russia. That's just, if you
pardon me, of the First Order.
The danger was that the Europeans
would understand
what they have if they could unify to
develop it.
The United States wants Greenland in
short so that Europe cannot get it.
That's where we are. And it's one of the
things that is driving this kind of
behavior which is derogatory to Europe
in every way. Not just saying the things
it says. Not just mocking a Stormer or
Macron or Mer.
Not just in your face with the green,
you know, the attack on Denmark and on
on Greenland and all that it represent.
These are symbolic acts. Absolutely.
Part of the denigration. Absolutely. But
they are also strategic moves
to position yourself for the final
effort to constrain
Russia and China now together.
Your failure against China having been
in part bringing Russia closer rather
than further away. horrific mistake
uh that he blames on Biden, which is
silly because it comes out of a
consensus in this country, but he's
desperate. He will say whatever he he
has to. You should see Mr. Trump as a
desperate
politician because that's what he is.
There isn't brilliant planning. There
isn't clever maneuver. There's
desperation which can sometimes give you
a moment of genius. No question. But it
is desperation. That's key here. Not the
genius moment in an otherwise desperate
piece of theater.
Well, you're definitely right on the US
efforts to drain allies. And if um if
you look at why the Europeans are
willing to accept these terrible trade
deals and wouldn't surprise me if they
decide to make a deal with Greenland in
terms of handing over some sovereign
territories for American bases which
will be solely under EU's control. All
of this is uh very likely and the reason
I think is because after 80 years the
Europeans do not have the political
imagination to consider anything that
doesn't entail America's leadership and
I think all of these massive concessions
which goes against the national interest
which weakens Europe divides Europe is
the assumption that by showing this kind
of subordination that this obedience
will uh win the love of Washington if
you will uh to show that the alliance is
still worth keeping. I I think what the
European leaders don't understand is
this is not a gift so we can patch
things up the marriage together. This is
the divorce settlement. The U the US
recognizes that that the alliance is is
is not going to last. The Europeans
don't have much to offer. This is they
want to snatch what they can on the way
out and and they're handing over the the
the strategic advantage. It is just very
strange to watch. And uh but I in terms
of your question though, I don't think
the Europeans would be able to unify
against the United States because Europe
has its own problems. Again, what is
Europe? You have this 27 member states
in the EU and the EU is not capable
anymore of delivering proper economic
benefit partly because of the
subordination to the United States, but
also the more authoritarian
approach, the the rule of law being
walked away from in terms of sanctioning
their own citizens, all all these
things. So I'm a bit skeptical to what
extent Europe will be capable of
standing up to the US. It's too simple
to easy to play the Europeans against
each other I think. But um the real wild
card here though in the rise of China is
really it seems not wild card but what
changed it so fundamentally from my
perspective is the role of Russia
because I think future historians will
look at this and be shocked because
Russia since Gorbachov they pursued this
common European home. they that that was
their objective to integrate with the
west and uh even in the beginning of the
'9s they even signed agreements with us
for having a panuropean security
architecture. Uh however because the
Russians were weak instead went for this
hegemonic system that means NATO
expansion but still the Russians tried
Boris Yelson Vladimir Putin they both
suggested joining NATO if this was going
to be the main organization they said
you know in 2008 they proposed this
panuropean security architecture in 2010
they proposed the EUR Russia union 2013
Ukraine and Russia proposed a EU Ukraine
Russia trilateral agreement so we can
have a common Europe instead of dividing
heading lines. They rejected this of
course and instead when they toppled the
government in Ukraine something
fundamentally different happened in
Russia for the first time in 300 years
they decided that since Peter the great
that a western centric foreign policy
was no longer possible and they should
instead of greater Europe have greater
Eurasia so look east. And just at this
time in 2014 is the same time that
Chinese are starting to develop their
belt and road initiative. They're
developing their own development banks.
They're announcing this very ambitious
industrial policies. They have the
capabilities and the intention to
challenge the economic primacy of the
United States. So that we did this at
this point in history for me is just
there was the biggest mistake that could
possibly be done. And um uh so I I I
just don't I I wonder how you see Russia
in this context though. Uh because the
Americans, the Europeans seem to be
banking on the idea that we can go back
to a cold war where we have the common
interest with the US to balance the
Russians. But the Americans, they seem
to see it differently. They see, well,
Russia's not a problem. They're not a
challenger. Why why would we push the
Russians closer to the Chinese? So the
whole assumption of the Europeans that
this is a unifying issue, the hatred of
Russia, it just seems to be such a
strategic error which ignores, as you
said, China.
>> Yeah. My my view again I I do it
historically.
If you take the last 75 years, China is
the most dramatic change. I mean it
literally goes from the largest country
in the world that is also arguably the
poorest country in the world. You know
we all grew up here in the United States
or I mean many of us reading a novel by
an American missionary named Pearl Buck.
It was called The Good Earth. You may
know it. I it's a study of China by a
missionary American missionaries I
believe who had went to China to to to
build Christianity and all that. But
it's a book that describes a level of
poverty that for most Americans is the
image of China as the ultimate example
of abject poverty. Okay. They make a
revolution
and the revolution is committed to
taking them out of the horrific poverty
that they were. This is the American
understanding and making them into a
modern econ. And they did it. They have
come further
faster than any economic development
ever that we have any record of.
far outperforming
Europe or America in terms of growing
the GDP per capita any other way no
matter how you measure it and I've done
all those measurements so the the
Chinese transformed themselves
number one number two the Russians as
you rightly put it transformed
themselves
they transformed themselves doubly the
way you described from Peter the trade
with a European
emphasis to now Mr. Putin's unambiguous
redirection to the east. But they've
also gone through a communist revolution
in 1917,
a counterrevolution in 1989.
Wow. They have fundamentally
questioned, challenged, and changed
their direction.
But who hasn't done that? Europe and the
West, they haven't done anything like
that. They haven't had anything
comparable to these sorts of changes.
They're on the same trajectory. Europe
used, if I may be allowed, used
nationalism
to break out of feudalism, to take the
Holy Roman Empire, which is one in
Normandy, and carve it up into separate
eventually nations.
nation building and transition to
capitalism are so woven up into each
other that it isn't so surprising is it
that the Europeans to this day are so
deeply wedded to the nationalism story
to the importance of being a Hungarian
rather than a Slovac or a Pole instead
of a Lithuanian. I mean, my for God's
sake, it's as if Americans were really
excited about being in New Jersey rather
than Wisconsin.
It would strike Americans as silly,
right? and the United States as the
ultimate achievement of this nationalism
story
which is inheriting God's decision to
favor the United States literally.
It's the manifest destiny of the United
States to be the global hegeimon. They
haven't changed anything. And if history
teaches us anything, it seems to me it
teaches us
that the biggest mistake you can make is
to assume that the conditions that made
a strategy work at point A in time
should be preserved because they will be
equally effective much later. That's
never true. What is true is that if you
try that, you will fail. If you don't
adjust, if you don't ask yourself
fundamental questions, you will fail to
find the answer. The question that you
refuse to face doesn't disappear because
you refuse to face it.
It's right there. And that failure will
come back to haunt you. It seems to me
that the nationalism, which by the way
is not just a problem in Europe, it's a
problem here in the United States, too.
It takes a different form here because
we are one country. But it means that
the whole world
barely exists for us.
That's why the fights inside the United
States are in the end what's going to
change this country because it does not
allow global affairs.
the president who embarrasses us because
he can't keep straight how Iceland is
not Greenland or thousand other
variations of this ignorance. That's a
very American phenomena.
Most Americans have no idea where
Ukraine is, let alone what it is. No
idea.
It's a war that United States is
fighting not only by proxy but more than
the proxy of the Europeans and the poor
Ukrainians
is that the whole idea of that war is a
piece of theater shaped by the media
here led by the politicians and the
academicians who to their everlasting
discredit go along with it. These are
morality plays in which the good battles
the evil with as much reality as the the
childish story told to a child early in
their Christian education when they are
six years old.
We don't ever graduate. And that that
failure to question and to change
that that's why the Russians and the
Chinese are in a an infinitely better
place. And by the way, time is on their
side and they know it. People wonder,
why does Mr. Trump do all this? And Mr.
Xi Jinping says very little and Mr.
Putin even says relatively little. My
guess is they're talking to each other
every night in disbelief at the
selfdestruction of the West. They don't
need to intervene. The west is doing a
fine job all by itself.
>> Yeah. No, I I think that's also a
approach now to understand what of
Russian restraints are because they know
that the further up they lift their
head, the more it can function to uh to
to begin to bring together some of the
west again. So in other words, it
doesn't have to do much. It doesn't have
to have any active sabotage. You don't
need some Russia gate in the real world.
There's none of this. All they have to
do is keep their head down and it looks
like the West will rip themselves apart.
It's quite extraordinary. Um, but how
how do you see all of this? I mean, we
were talking about economics, we're
talking about the um the political
configuration, but what does this mean
for security and war? Because usually
historically new world orders only tend
to form after major wars. That is we see
um well after every major war you have a
new change distribution of power. Uh you
have sometimes you have the collapse of
certain actors such as Soviet Union
which transforms the world but usually
we move towards war that is the dominant
states aren't going to simply hand over
uh walk away from the throne. So how do
you see this? Do you do you see the
possibility of actually going to war
against Russia or China because it seems
very suicidal not just for those
attacking but for the whole planet. So h
how are you assessing this uh or is this
posturing?
>> Well no I think there's a genuine
issue there is a lot of posturing going
on but there is also a general and a
genuine uh debate. I don't think that
debate is resolved at all. It's a debate
between those and I'm going to be crude
now, but to get to the key point, those
who understand that time is not on our
side and who therefore argue fight the
war sooner, not later.
And so they will be eager to bomb Iran.
When? Last week.
That so they're there. that that's a
serious group within the military and
and and more broadly. And then there the
other group which says you are out of
your mind. We live in a nuclear age and
that's a card that cannot be played. Not
by us, not by the other side either.
And they are having a debate. They've
been having this debate quite a while.
So they're used to it. There are now the
sons of the people who were debating
that 30 years ago and they're having
that debate now and asking themselves
sometimes whether the changed global
conditions affect the debate and for
some of them they do others are are
staying with what they are
and why well the experience doesn't give
a clear answer it's under it's well
understood
that the war in Vietnam
was lost. For the American people,
that's not a clear understanding. Not at
all. But for this thinkers in the
establishment of our political life,
they understand a portion understand
very well that that was a war. It took
half a million American soldiers, boots
on the ground, and we were defeated.
And Vietnam was at the time one of the
poorest countries on earth
in a war against the United States,
which was at that time arguably the most
militarily developed
power in the world. So the strongest
against one of the weakest and the
weakest win. The enemy was the Viet the
Communist Party of North Vietnam and
that's basically who inherited the
country when the United States left was
forced out.
I won't bore you but you know that in
Afghanistan more or less the same story.
Taliban is in charge now. Taliban was
the enemy. They won. We lost. We are
losing in Ukraine. It's arguable who won
what in Iraq, but a clear win for the
United States, not at all.
So using boots on the ground,
even against poor countries, is not a
recipe that goes very far here.
The reason that the US chose to do the
abduction of Maduro was because they
couldn't do anything any other way.
Mr. Trump, well, we could have sent in.
No, you couldn't. You know how we know
you couldn't? Because you didn't. And
you didn't because you don't want to
fight an indefinite war in a very rugged
countryside. Uh Venezuela has lots of
mountains and jungles and whoa. Are you
talking about a a a horrible rerun of
Asia only now in Latin America? You
don't want that. you there will be
hundreds of thousands of Latin Americans
who will volunteer to fight the United
States in Venezuela. They know that too.
So they you're watching a a struggle
here whose parallel and now maybe this
is where you want me to go whose
parallel is also the economic
difficulties. The United States economy
I'm a professor of economics this is my
job is now more unequal
than it has been in my lifetime and I
have gray hair.
If you any measure you want the division
of wealth, the division of income, uh
the disposable income, what whichever
measure, and there's a dozen of them, uh
you use, we are at a level of
inequality.
A recent statistic says that the top 10%
of our people account for more than half
of all consumption.
The other 90%
have less than half of the consumption.
What are you talking?
People are furious. There is no job.
There are no jobs for people. The income
isn't enough.
Today, today the 23rd of January, 2026.
The AFL CIO, our conservative [snorts]
major national labor union federation,
its local body in the city of
Minneapolis, a major city in the middle
of the country, called for and has
organized a general strike.
The last time Minneapolis had one of
those was in the depths of the
depression in 1934.
And what is it about this time? Is it
about economics? Uh wages in it. Is that
the real reason? Probably. But what is
the ostensible reason? Ready? Opposition
to ICE and to Trump,
the mayor of the city and the governor
of the state are supporting the general
strike again. What do you This is a
level of social division we have not
seen
for decades, almost a century.
Very severe problems and they're not
being solved not by the tariffs, not by
anything he's doing. The level of of
deficit that our budget will have in
this coming year is even greater than it
was in the past years. And Mr. Trump was
committed to doing the exact opposite.
He's proposing a 50% increase in
military spending. By the way, another
message to Europe.
If you're impressed that Mertz is going
to increase military spending by $800
billion over the next 10 years, think
about the following. The United States
is going to increase its by $600 billion
in one year.
Europe is not going to challenge the
United States at the level of military
by this kind of an action. That's way
too little and way too late.
Those are the realities that we are
confronting I think right now.
Well, to what extent though as a just a
last question is it do you think there's
any momentum for fundamentally changing
the way the political west look at
economics? Because after two world wars
it looked like we kind of learned our
lessons a bit with wild capitalism. that
is uh from 45 to well 1980 we kind of
had uh well some restraint. uh we had
more intervention into the economy for
different reasons but uh but nonetheless
it this was seen as acceptable but until
this 1970s when we as you suggested
before we had the economic stagnation
and the solution was well let's just uh
deregulate uh remove some social
responsibility
um yeah get rid of all this public
ownership and the assumption then being
you know you have a more flexible
economy but then we can get it to grow
which um many would say yeah was a good
idea to get things going. But it was
what it would probably be good as a
temporary tool and until the economy
starts running again and then kind of uh
reintroduced some of the regulation and
social responsibility. But instead we
saw in the 1980s this deregulated uh
markets uh well where the market runs
wild without any intervention. it became
an ideology under Reagan Thatcher and
suddenly the political rights uh
couldn't redist couldn't intervene in
the market to protect traditional values
and institutions be it church or family
whatever would be the political left
couldn't redistribute wealth and uh and
you know you you saw problems build up
through the 80s and then you would have
thought at the end of the 80s now is the
time to tighten up a bit and uh well
make sure that society doesn't uh go out
of control as you mentioned economic
inequalities. But then of course the
Soviet Union collapses and suddenly
liberal economics goes on steroids in
the following hubris and for the past 30
years we all been wor woring at you know
the altar of the free market where well
the market will take care of everything.
Society is just some appendage that will
follow wherever the market goes. But it
seems that we have you know come to the
end of the road. uh as we have this do
you see an indication that we might try
to get get back on track uh challenge
the religion of our time which is this
free market?
>> Yes, I do think it's possible and I know
since we're coming to the end of the of
the time that we have let let me be bold
and tell you what what I imagine might
happen. Okay.
If I ask myself as I have and as my
profession does, what is the secret?
What did the Chinese figure out that
enabled them to have the economic growth
record of the last 30 to 40 years? I
mean, that should be the number one
question.
Adam Smith is is is considered the
founder of economics because he asked
the question as per the title of his
great book what accounts for quote the
wealth of nations. they asked himself
that should be you know that was his
question that should be ours and if you
ask that question then the country you
want to focus on is China at least if
you want to explain the growth you might
want to focus elsewhere if you want to
explain the absence of growth and that's
sort of what what Smith did we need it
again and if you do that kind of thing
if you take the discipline of economics
seriously
then you will know that the giant
Chinese have proceeded by asking
themselves
what is it to get economic growth? What
is it that we should be doing as state
enterprise and what should we be doing
as private enterprise?
What can we do? What should we what do
we need to do to keep it in Chinese
hands? What can we allow to be done by
foreign hands?
And they have very practically, very
pragmatically
answered that question. And they've
produced a hybrid economy, an economy
that is varyingly, but roughly 5050
private and state,
heavily Chinese, but with a big
allowance for foreign enterprises to
function. Very practical. They have not
been ideological.
They didn't do what you can argue the
Russians did by prioritizing state
enterprise. And they didn't do what the
West did by prioritizing private
enterprise and raising it to the level
of ideological hysteria.
Well, that would be an interesting
argument. You could make that. But we
don't do that. But here comes my
optimism. I think we will. I think there
will be and there already is in the
United States a growing question. What
exactly have the Chinese?
Why are they better than we are in
electric vehicles, in solar panels, in
AI that is practically usable and on and
why are they contesting us in the most
advanced uh semiconductor chips and all
the rest of it.
Those questions are being asked with the
inevitable
followup.
Well, I I think we are learning that we
have been stuck in a horrible
stale development
of a debate which is better,
you know,
private or government. And that was the
wrong question for me. That's about as
interesting as asking which is better,
Tuesday or Friday.
or which is the better number, six or
nine?
You know, these are questions that are
[snorts] senseless.
Who cares? It's it's all the results
that matter, not
this purity test of public or private.
Where did we get that crazy idea? If for
every example you can show me where
private
did something better than public
equivalent, I'll show you the opposite.
What have we achieved by that? Nothing.
That's the whole point. Sometimes this
is a better way. Sometimes this is an
alternative is a better way. We do that
everywhere else. What is this religious
problem here that we have? Which is
really what what it is the effort of the
private sector to protect itself against
what? Against the government. That's all
it's ever been. The fear of the
government because with universal
suffrage, the government is in the end
beholden to the workers who are the
majority. And for a capitalist, that's
always been a problem. How can you
possibly coexist in a society with
universal suffrage and democratic
voting? You're always at risk. How do
you handle the risk? By preventing the
public sector from touching your
economy. So you can't you hold it back
from exercising its democratic origins
to control the economic life. It's
childish when you think about it this
way.
I think that's emerging in this country.
I even think it's part of the general
strike in Minneapolis today. It is an
awareness of people finally
that they really do have to take control
of this system. Even Mr. Trump's
popularity was based on an attempt to
tell the American people what they
already knew. You have lost all control.
Vote for me. I'll put what you want into
effect. They voted for him. And he's
changing nothing. And that's the
reality. He didn't change anything
fundamental in his first presidency.
All he's doing in the second is more
theatrics. He he learned that he's got
to dominate the daily news cycle and
he's much better at that than he was the
first time. And the Europeans
unfortunately
play into that.
But I think the hope is both that the
European people and the American people
will look for changes in the west
comparable to the changes Russia and
China experience. And what might that
be? Let me end with this provocation.
What is preventing the Europeans
from making a decision
that they bet on the wrong horse?
They they ought to be following Mr.
Putin into a long, difficult, but
potentially
worldchanging
realignment.
There is a rumor that Macron once asked
if he and France could join the bricks.
I don't know if that rumor is true or
not,
but if it isn't, let me suggest that
investigating that and forming a Europe
which is negotiating with the United
States from a position of the strength
of an alliance with Russia and China
would be a very different future for
everybody.
>> Yeah. Now I always said that the
Europeans could learn a bit from the way
China developed. That is I think you
know we could invite Chinese more
Chinese capital to Europe but instead of
being a technological colony it could be
done uh under agreements such as through
also joint ventures including some
technological transfer. All of this
would not just allow Europe to thrive,
but it would also be a foundation for
unity because uh the collective
bargaining power would would be the
reasoning behind this. So it would be
better than having unity through hate
for Russia or the dream of subordination
to the United States. And as you said,
that could lay a foundation for having
more peaceful relations with Russia.
also by reaching out to the Chinese and
diversifying we could also have more
equal relationship with the United
States instead of being so you know
excessively dependent but uh
>> and it could even in the short run do
wonders for Europe to once again have
cheap oil gas flowing in from Russia. I
mean, come on. It it's kind of obvious
that there would be all kinds of
benefits. And you're quite right. If you
look at the history of China, that's
what they did. They basically said to
the West, "If you come, we will give you
cheap industrial trained workers and
access to the Chinese market, which is
the largest and fastest growing in the
world." Well, you know, I've taught in
business schools. That's what we teach
young entrepreneurs. You want to
succeed, go where the wages are low and
the market is growing. Well, they did.
They went to China. Now, what would be
the the Chinese demand? We will give you
the workers. We will give you the access
to the market. You've got to share your
technology. You've got to share your
distribution system. You know if you go
to the big uh retail in this in the
United States is dominated by uh Walmart
and tar target okay so it's dominated
though and what you find in those retail
stores is all the Chinese you know
material but the Chinese who could
produce a better could never have
accessed the American market without a
distribution system which it would have
taken them 50 years to develop. Instead,
they made a deal with the American
corporation.
Walmart, which is the richest
corporation, the largest employer in the
United States, is absolutely dependent
on China.
China is part of the Walmart story.
Okay. If the if Walmart could do it, you
want to tell me why can't why can't we
all do this? learn from the Chinese,
work out a deal and Europe would be the
beneficiary. It too could write the
contracts. You Europe is a rich market.
Still is. Europe has has got three 400
million people uh buying materials and
Europe has less of an inequality problem
than we do. You're in a good position.
The Chinese need your markets, etc. you
you can still do it, but you have to do
it. And this requires your willingness
to question what you're doing. And all I
see, and please correct me if I'm wrong,
but I see a Starmer and a Macron and a
Merittz and a Maloney. Not able, and I
don't the others are no better. Not able
to to even begin to think in anything
other than a way in which Russia is the
great bear that they have to worry
about. There's something very pathetic
about it all.
>> Well, I I do think that Europe can still
turn this thing around if they do well
the things you you outlined now, but uh
I I I just don't see it happening. Uh
it's well, not not with this political
class. I think we need some political
revolutions across Europe, but but
again, as you said, it's still a large
population. It still has wealth. It can
turn things around. But uh uh first they
have to stop pretending that they're
redoing World War II and get rid of some
of this crazy ideology and hatred of the
Russians, make some deals with the
Chinese. I think that would create some
balance. But uh let's uh at least try to
stay optimistic that there is still some
hope and uh thank you very much for
being so generous with your time.
My pleasure, Glenn, and thank you for
having programs that are willing to look
at these issues and open up the
conversations.
