Hi everyone and welcome. I am joined today by the economist and professor Richard Wolf and uh I always look forward to speaking with you. So uh welcome back to the program. Thank you very much. I enjoy your work Glenn and it's a it's an honor to be part of it. Thank you. So uh well in this um Russia NATO proxy war in Ukraine the focus is always on the military conflict but it's also an economic war. Indeed, as we learned in the beginning of this in at least in 2022, the goal and the initial assumption was that uh the NATO countries could break the Russian economy relatively fast that is isolated in the international system, put crippling sanctions and uh some expected that this you know could be done by the weekend almost but uh uh obviously this did not play out as expected. I I guess uh starting with a broad question before digging into the details. What was the economic strategy? Uh I guess the assumptions it rested on and why didn't it succeed? Well, I think there were two at least issues that the western world which is Western Europe mostly the EU and the United States did not um assess correctly. I don't think there's any amount of spinning uh that's going to erase a very clear sense that they underestimated the ability of the Russians to wage a conventional military war and they overestimated the ability of economic sanctions to be a powerful weapon. uh in the event that the military didn't work out and they had unfortunately miscalculated on both counts, they underestimated the the Russian military potential and they overestimated the impact sanctions can have and so they've lost the war and they find it virtually impossible. uh well not virtually. They find it impossible to recognize this misjudgment. You know, when people go into war, they should know that wars have a nasty tendency to have outcomes that were not expected, to have failed to take into account one or another resource on either side. And therefore, one of the reasons you don't have a war besides all of the obvious political, moral, physical costs is the uncertainty. And it is a terrible mistake not to give to uncertainty the respect it ought to have. And nothing illustrates that better than what we see uh now. You know, the Russians are much larger country than Ukrainians. So, there's an obvious advantage in manpower that the that the Russians bring to such a conflict, that should have slowed people down. But nowadays when we spy on one another with satellites and so on to misunderstand that the Russians have more missiles and have more drone capability uh and even if they didn't have it in February of 2022, they have the capacity to enlarge their production and that's well known or should have been well known and that made the whole military thing uh dubious. And they understood that because really from the beginning uh the Europeans and the Americans were willing and able to keep increasing the quality and the quantity of military support. Remember early in the war uh they weren't going to get big tanks. They got them. They weren't going to get F-16s. They got them. They weren't going to get this or that missile capability. They got it. It was raised each time without admitting that obviously you had thought they would not be necessary because you're providing them exposed after the war is well underway. after you had your chance back in March and April of 2022 to reach a negotiated settlement, the famous meetings in in Istanbul and so forth. So I think they they systematically underestimated Russia's military capability and likewise then they misunderstood um the sanctions. And there's two things to say about that. Number one, there's a long history of sanctions. Maybe not as big as the ones the Europeans imposed on Russia. Maybe not as overwhelming as having both the United States and the Europeans impose sanctions. On the other hand, the history of sanctions is mostly a history of failure and and it and that's documented. There are books, I've read them, there are articles, I've read them about sanctions asking the logical question, did the sanction achieve the objective that was stated for it? And there's a pretty strong consensus that sanctions may be a burden. Sanctions may entail some costs for their objects, but they very rarely achieve anything like a decisive outcome. And that makes me wonder why this extraordinary confidence in the west that these sanctions would have the effect. You know, I follow uh the situation of the little country of Cuba. It had 8 million people when the sanctions began. It has, I think, 11 or 12 million people today. It has been a systematic devastating sanction for Cuba. Cuba has paid all kinds of costs of being the object of sanctions. I don't deny that for a moment. But this the obvious reality is despite the political isolation and despite the sanctions, Cuba is as resolute an opponent of the United States today in every way uh as it ever was, you know, during the time of Fidel Castro and since his death, it did not work. It didn't produce regime change. It didn't change the economic system. None of it. And you know, it's pathetic that it would be continued this long against a little country. But perhaps the most important thing for us to talk about now is a different issue which I would like to bring to the four because I think it touches many other burning issues. We live in a different world economy. It is radically different from what it was 20 years ago and even more different from what it was in the second half of the 20th century. At that time, the United States dominated the flows of capital, the exports in the world, the imports in the world, the the loans. I mean, it doesn't matter. The dollar was the sovereign global currency, etc., etc. All of that is no longer true and nothing has replaced it in the west. There has been something that has risen while the economic importance of the United States and its allies in Western Europe, the G7, if you want to think of it that way. That decline of the G7 has not stopped. It's continuing as I speak to you. And the rise of an alternative continues to be as badly underestimated as was the military capability of Russia and the overestimate of the sanctions. And I'm talking about China and the bricks. What Russia did was turn to China and the bricks. Russia, remember, is a founding member of the bricks and an important part of it, heaven knows. And they turned to their partners, above all China and India and Indonesia and others, and they turned to them for extraordinary help in offsetting both their military problems and the sanctions. And from everything I can tell sitting here in New York as an American, the uh strategic planning under both Mr. Biden and Mr. Trump did not acknowledge, did not count on, did not foresee what the bricks could bring to the Russians in this time around military and sanctions. And you know, if you can't sell oil and gas, if it's a crucial export, as it is for Russia, if you can't sell it to Western Europe, but you can sell it to India, China, Indonesia, what's the power of the sanctions? I mean, it makes no sense at all. You can't you can't do it. And I think you're you're watching the slow and I am stunned by just how slow it is. It wasn't that long ago that Mr. Trump gave a news conference and a reporter asked a question about the bricks and he dismissed it. That's not an important matter. Well, I all I can tell you is as a professional economist looking at the world as I have been doing all my life, it's about the most important thing I can think of in terms of changing the economic uh conditions. And here's your my final point. We could talk about sanctions and I can tell you in detail how the bricks helped, but it might be even more important for people to understand that the effectivity in terms of the war in Ukraine that was misunderstood, the effectivity of the bricks is now being similarly misunderstood because the bricks is going to have an enormous ous impact on whether the tariff program of Mr. Trump ends up being good for the United States or a disaster for the United States in the way that the Ukraine war has been acknowledged as a disaster by Mr. Trump himself. I mean he explains the disaster differently. He blames differently, but it is a disaster. He says so. Most of the rest of the world admits it. The Western Europeans are becoming daily more depressed, more isolated, and more slowly arriving at the same conclusion. They don't want to admit it, but it is fairly obvious. But again, the bricks is is the change. And I don't mean to take away from China. I mean, China is obviously the center of what the bricks represent. But it's very important that the Chinese have a growing strong alliance, nine or 10 partners and another dozen affiliates or whatever they exactly call them. You are you are seeing them prepared for the kind of turn to nationalist economics that nobody else is prepared. Europe is divided and woefully unable to deal with the new world economy and the United States ditto. The actions therefore are desperate like a tariff on everybody. But the irony is the best position to handle that is China and the bricks. It's extraordinary what we are watching uh unfold and it leads all kinds of people not just you know a few like me I am in this case not at all I wouldn't mind if I were the only one but I am not not at all and you know that you've interviewed you know Giannis Varu Fakis will will explain the same thing from a different angle he focuses a bit more on the dollar and and all of those issues But he's quite interesting and quite right. But he's one of many who are slowly in his case not so slowly. He but he has a unique experience because of being the finance minister in Greece and his long history of writing about these issues. You remember Trump he said well uh regarding the deolarization I threaten 100% on bricks so brick bricks is finished and this dismissive approach of opponents I think this is this is a real weakness not just of the United States but the Europeans as well and uh you know they say that uh you know everyone expected Russia to break and uh but that's not really true it's because they censored all this scent I mean me personally I this is the only thing I was working on since 200 2014 almost this is Russia's economic reorganizations to the east under this greater Eurasia initiative and uh again I told everyone here you should you know if you want to understand what the Russians as well as the Chinese are doing you should read Hamilton you should read Fredick list you should read Sergeit this is where the you know this is these are the ideas that are being followed now and uh essentially yeah you know you're shut down you say well you know you're trying to delegitimize the sanctions you're suggesting they don't work so we won't follow and you know so the Europeans especially went into this you know being very blind death and dumb or as our friend Vfakis say you know the stupid continent and I think this is a huge huge problem but uh uh but again I think my my my point is that the assumption that the Russians would simply try to wait this one out it fails to recognize what they're trying to do here which is uh this merely intensified what they've done over the past at least eight plus years which us to transition away from this American model and towards this multipolar economic infrastructure. Uh but you you did say that uh you know uh you could say how how bricks helped the Russians uh skirt the sanctions. How um how did you assess this because again I know it goes across many spheres but what what what do you look at specifically? Well, for me, you know, this is an attempt to shut the, you know, in the United States there is I I forget who said it, but some nasty fellow referred to um Russia as a gas station trying to function as a country or some something clever. McCain. Yeah, Russia's a country, a gas station masquerading as a country. I always said that Russia is a civilization masquerading as a country, but fair enough. Yes. Yes. And so we have been taught uh that it is customary to believe about Russia that um something went terribly wrong there in uh 1917. that the trauma of World War I uh the trauma that Russia lost that war uh plunged it into a mistaken uh direction uh led by Lenin and Drosky and Stalin and all of that. Um they made an experiment. It lasted 60 to 70 years and then the intrinsic unworkability of the socialist model uh brought it to an end in 1989 1990 and that ushered in the great uniolar moment for the United States to kind of take over the position it had already held in many ways since the end of World War II uh to dominate the world totally since the Soviet Union had been the only obstacle to all of that. uh and we were told basically we were taught including by the professors who specialized in the Soviet Union and Russia and all of that because during the cold war for example in my education and I'm a product of the elite schools of the United States uh I went to Harvard and Stanford and Yale that's my education 10 years in that silly sequence of institutions. But I had the professors who were really well known in this area and they explained that it was uh 30 years since the uh 1990 and that Russia has had to undo all of the mistakes that the Soviet Union represented. And so it had become uh you know a backward country that exported its agriculture, its mining and its minerals. It's whatever was under the ground as so much raw material for others then to use and the energy story fit into that. We were shown how big a share of GDP, oil and gas were all all of that. It meant that you understood the Soviet Union as a wildly lopsided in its industrial development and wildly dependent on exports. And neither of those things is particularly true. It it it they are not just exaggerations but they misconstrue what Russia was trying to do. They made the same mistake in China. I mean they recognize China went further but China too was seen as a lopsided underdeveloped socialistically mismanaged export dependent country. And therefore these people should be easily defeated especially in a war of attrition and should also be easily suffocated by shutting off the exports upon which they depended in different ways but they both depended and the United States was in the ideal position because they depended on exporting there mostly and to Western Europe secondarily. So this this was an image that was incorrect, had more to do with the second half of the 20th century than it did with what has happened since that time. And each day it becomes more and more of a caricature that meant that this logic of the sanctions wouldn't work. that what you would see is what we have in fact now seen that the exports would be shifted somewhere else. The imports that the exports paid for would now be paid for because they'd be drawn from other parts of the world and paid for by exports to those other parts of the world. And finally, those other parts of the world, whether we're talking grain export or fertilizer export or oil and gas export, there's enough of them. They are big enough and rich enough now to be able to handle the adjustment that the Russians are making. And as you rightly say, these were already things underway. They didn't have to be started from scratch. And so what this has done is accelerated a process that's already there. And one last point on this. It is surprising in a way that the United States would continue to say, as Mr. Trump says even over the last two days, that the war is a negative experience for the Russians economically. It's strange for the United States because our history in the last century was a history in which going to war in World War II is what re overcame the Great Depression. The going to war wasn't a damaging experience in the 1940s. It was an economic boost. The rate of growth, GDP soared. The mass of people unemployed were put to work. Half of them in the military, the other half producing the equipment the military used. And something like that is what happened in Russia. They got a stimulus out of this war, which is part of why the ruble didn't collapse and the depression didn't descend on Russia. None of it. None of it. And I'm not, you know, I'm not saying that the Russian economy doesn't have problems. It does. Or that the bricks don't have problems. They do. Or that the bricks aren't very heterogeneous. They are. All of that is true, but it doesn't change that going to war against Russia and sanctioning Russia are projects for which the changes in the world economy have made them ineffective regarding the yeah the way they look at Russia but also the Chinese for that sake. It's often said in the military that um you know the generals always fight the previous war, but it's also true with um the economic warfare. I've heard people who met and know um the US Secretary of Treasur Scott Bessant uh who said that you know his views for example on China was you know they're a communist country they you know they don't do economics well they don't innovate you know they steal and and kind of they they lean into this uh ideological stereotypes from u from the 20th century looking at the Soviet Union but of course we can say that China China is very very different from what the Soviet Union ever was indeed their ability to innovate and all but uh of course Russia is no China now they're much smaller in every way but but the extent to which they're able to develop a lot of technological sovereignty their own digital ecosystems you know diversify not just rely on the physical corridors facilitated by the Chinese and the belt and road but have their own uh you know the the financial diversification with the banks and payment systems and all of this. This is uh this is quite significant and the fact as you said that they couldn't have done this alone but you know they're not pursuing a Russian hedgemonic Eurasia. They're they're they know that they need to work and harmonize their interest with the other major actors. So, China and India and all of the others. So, it's just uh I think again it's always this tendency I think to underestimate uh the other side especially when you lean heavily into this uh um yeah ideological stereotypes. Uh but uh what what do you think went focusing on one specific issue on the sanctions? Because in in Europe uh we took a heavy blow to our economies by cutting oursel off Russian oil and gas. The idea was that you know this would be the silver bullet. This would uh you know destroy the Russian economy. Uh of course there's other aspects too but what do you think went wrong on the on the on the energy? Why why why why couldn't we predict uh the Russians ability to diversify? Yeah, I do think it's very heavily dependent here on ideology because we're talking about calculations. We no one can see the future. So the people in the Pentagon and the people in Washington are like we are trying to figure out in some sense what's going on. What are the risks? What are the shifts that we have to take into account as we go after our objective? If we put aside the objective for the moment, I ask myself as you do, how do we account for such a miscalculation? You know, in a way it's an old question. How do we account for you know whether it's Hitler or whether it's Napoleon people who fight win some and then lose catastrophically what happened you know what what is it that they obviously didn't do because the outcome is the opposite of what they were trying to achieve and I'm afraid I wish this weren't true that the United States is in a sense a victim of its own um kind of inability to to adjust to a change world. Let let me give you an idea of how it works because it's it's it's going on right now. It is very very important. I'm going to start with with China. I have been interested in China since I was a graduate student in economics. I wrote my master's thesis on the Chinese communes and why did Mao do that early on after the revolution. Uh why did they not succeed? Why did why were they abandoned and so forth. Um, so I followed these issues all my career, you know, for many decades now. And I never stopped being amazed at my professors. And because I went to the elite schools, my professors have been the economic advisors of most of the presidents, the Bushes, the Clintons, the Obama. These are people that I that I know personally and who who were my teachers in many cases and whose work I read. I cannot tell you how many times when I would ask a question about some economic development in China, I would be told by them that these statistics were not real. that unlike our statistics which are gathered by objective measurement and all of that, the Chinese being communists and since I knew who communists were, I understood that this is a caricature. But it kept on going after it became impossible to pretend that China hadn't economically developed pretty much along the lines of what they had claimed. I got the second level of argument. Well, yes, they have made some gains. And you know why that is? because uh Deng Xiao Ping opened China up to private capitalist enterprise both Chinese and non-Chinese welcomed the west to come you know uh President Nixon and Henry Kissinger made their famous trip in the 70s and opened China up and so these very smart and clever communists brought in the capitalism without which they could not have had. And when I would point out how much of the statistical growth had been achieved before this transition, they just brushed it away. They I was wasting their time. They knew what was done and that the very growth of capitalism was the recognition by the Chinese Communist Party that its only future lay with an everinccreasing cap private capitalist sector eating up and being the beneficiary of the endless atrophy of the governmental run. The notion that you had a different system here, that you would have an economy that would be 50% private, 50% uh government, and that the government sector would invest in all the things that were judged to be necessary, but for which private profit wasn't an sufficient incentive. that this is another way of understanding how you allocate capital and the result is an economic growth rate on average for 30 years two to three times faster than what the United States can get should settle the matter you know and I'm I'm explaining that to the people who taught me to think like that and they don't know what to do when they hear it and so they handle it as dismissible. It's not part of the conversation. And they are going to throw around the weight of the United States in which they all grew up as I did too, the second half of the 20th century with America dominant. They don't think that's really been changed. They don't see it. They can't see it. And and the result is they are making catastrophic misjudgments. And even when you which I've done when you explain to them here, you misunderstood what the bricks can do. What does it mean that when uh Mr. Modi in India looks around the world and heaven knows he's no communist, he's no Marxist, he has no interest in any of that. But when he looks around the world and assesses the risks and rewards that are available to him, he's very careful to buy every last drop of oil that the Russians need to tell to send him and to respond to Mr. Trump by saying, you know, I I can't do what you're asking me to do and I'm not going to and you're going to have to live with it. Or you can declare war on the whole world, but then then you're crazier than the people who call you crazy now. And so we we I can't build my policy around that. And Xi Jinping is the same thing. and and more and more leaders around the world are concluding that you cannot uh you cannot deal like this. You you cannot you're dealing with people whose grasp on their situation is so different from yours that it's a little bit like trying to get Mr. Putin and Mr. Zalinski to sit down and talk to each other. They what's to discuss? They don't understand the the world they live in in a comparable way. At a certain point when when Russia finishes this job, which is the way it looks to me, of course, I could be wrong, but that's the way it looks to when when the troops are standing around Kiev or whatever it is, then there'll be a moment when when their perspectives will converge, but not yet. And so they're prepared to go fight till the last Ukrainian or nearly. So I I'm afraid to tell you that Ukraine, as I think you said at the beginning of our conversation, it's the flash point, but it's the flash point not just because there's armed conflict going over there, going on there, but it's the flash point about a global shift. And it is it is in irresolvable because the shift has not yet entered into the mental capability of of at least one side in this game. And if I may, I don't mean to change the topic, but it's a little bit like looking at the Gaza story. You know, one side believes it it's an existential threat that there are exist people known as Palestinians and how how you going to sit down with with Hamas or any other representative of the Palestinians and have a conversation if that's your attitude? You know, it's like asking, I don't know, Hitler to sit down with with the head of the Jewish community in Berlin and work out something. You can't because the the existence of one is the unacceptable to the other. And you know this in the end may be the most powerful argument that the Chinese will have to establish themselves as the global hedgeiment. I'm not saying that that's what's going to happen, but it certainly is an idea that ought to occur to people given the sequence of Dutch Empire, uh, British Empire, American Empire to to wonder about the Chinese as probably the next one isn't bizarre. It's a reasonable question um to interrogate. And I think the Chinese know it and I think the rest of the world knows it. and becomes very odd for the United States to pretend that none of that is a reasonable basis for people to function. Then the then it becomes the United States that's bizarre, not these other countries cuz they clearly understand how the Americans look at this. We are we are acting out a way of thinking about the world that they have witnessed anyway with us for the last hundred years. So they understand where this comes from. But they're living in another world and they see which world is fading and which world is emerging. And this has to be faced sooner or later. But I can tell you better than I can about anything else that we're not at that point. I want to remind everyone we just had a presidential election last November, not that long ago, in which the major candidates for president, Trump, Biden, and then Harris, none of them ever mentioned the declining empire of the United States. And none of them mentioned to my knowledge the bricks or any basic shift. There was nothing to discuss about a changed world economy that I find devastatingly powerful evidence that we have a very basic disconnect. And I think Mr. Trump is in the process of now discovering step by step that what he didn't calculate all of what he will no doubt call unintended consequences or what he'll blame on others is that you can't declare a tariff against the rest of the world. Can't do that. That is that is too crazy. That is too overwhelming. that is got too many variables going in too many directions to get you any confidence in whatever prediction you make. I mean, in the last 24 hours, the largest automobile company in this country, General Motors, responded to the tariffs whose intended purpose is to increase production, industrial production in the United States by explaining that they are decreasing it and increasing production of cars in Mexico. And Vanderline calls up Mr. Trump, says, "We can't meet the extension on June of the tariff game to June 1. Please give us an extension." And he gives an extension until July 9. I mean, what in the world is going on here? and the Europeans. And here maybe you know you should be I should interview you. Uh in the eur case of the Europeans the disarray the inability to get any kind of solidarity going that I can identify. I find that unbelievable. It's just how long are you going to go when the world is more and more the US and China and and Europe's relevance dissolves by the hour? I mean, it's just is there nobody in a position to do anything about that? And are you all going to let the Germans rearm again? I find it amazing. I think some of the strategic vacuum that exists uh both in the United States in Europe comes from yeah the inability to as you said recognize the time we live in. So you your example with the American presidential election that there's an election no one discusses the historical time we're living in actually the decline of US empire and now uh countries in the east and leading with China now taking over being the the key drivers of the global economy that this has to be the the central focus because when you develop a strategy you see the main trends you see you know your resources and you know what what how you can maximize your benefits within this context. But it's a bit problem after even after the cold war. This was a problem because we kept speaking of the postcold war era which is a very poor concept because you're just referring to what is no longer here. You know it used to be cold war now it's not. We should have called this the hegemonic era but you know it's not it's not good for marketing I guess but this is why I think the current era has to be defined as uh yeah the the end uh of uniolarity and transition to multipolarity. If you see it like this, the US could have some strategic clarity. Again, it will be good for America and good for the world. How US in relative decline. How does it rejust with the rest of the world? How can we live with the Chinese as a equal in a way that's you know mitigates the threats or challenges and maximize the benefits. But but these are not the talks we're having. Instead, we're talking about communism and the freedomloving peoples. And it's just like a one long Coca-Cola commercial. It's very strange. And we're missing the same here in Europe. You know, I don't want to too popular in Europe to bash the Americans, but here I think it's even worse because uh you know, we hedged our you know, wagon to the United States. This was going to be collective empire, a collective hedgeimony. And uh you know, in a multipolar world, you see the US drifting in other directions, having different priorities. So what are the Europeans doing? Instead of diversifying their economic connectivity, ending this militarized division of Europe, what do we do? Well, we try to increase our own stock value in America by, you know, being even more submissive, even more obedient, hoping that Americans will still value us as an ally and, you know, bump up us in the rank of priorities. So, uh, you know, a former hedgeimon will still think we're a priority. I mean, it the whole thing is quite insane. And as you said, the different Europeans have different interest. We know the EU is not, you know, pursuing the national interest of his members anymore. So it is uh yeah, complete chaos. And in this chaos, I think they're trying to grab on to the Russian boogeyman as a way to pull together uh consensus. But uh again, the this is a consensus which is further undermining our national interest. Again, remilitarizing the dividing lines of Europe and cutting our own economies. uh yeah down in size by cutting ourel off their energy and the huge Russian market. So, I don't know. I'm very yeah, I'm very frustrated by Europe and it's uh yes, little reason to optimism, but you did mention um yeah, the Ukraine war seemingly coming to an end. And I see this on the battlefield. You see the economy not doing well. Also, the internal cohesion is not great. You more Ukrainian voices recognizing that it's coming to an end. Ukrainians, also highranking Ukrainians are starting to recognize that perhaps the NATO countries weren't there to help, but to use the Ukrainians for, you know, their manpower to fight Russia. So things are starting to crack. I'm not saying it will crack fall apart within the next few weeks or even uh the next 2 3 months, but you know, we seem to be entering the end game here. So if we lose this war in NATO and NATO loses war which was you many people hoped this would revive the hegemonic era now it fears that it would break the you know the golden I think it was Polish president who said it that if we lose the war in Ukraine it will end the golden era of the west. Uh how what what do you think would happen? What will be the direct consequence not if but uh when we lose the war in Ukraine? I'm afraid that the way that that is shaping up here in the United States is that um Europe has very little to offer us and therefore can be dispensed with be you know uh Mr. Trump says, "I'm going to walk away. If I don't get what I want in Ukraine, well then I will walk away and it's a European problem." If I were the Europeans, I would be terrified of that. Not for the reason they are, which I understand the United States. If it, you know, if you couldn't defeat Russia with American weapons and with American money, you're sure as hell not going to do it without American weapons and American money. That's just silly. Uh, no one takes that seriously except perhaps the media in Europe. It's hard to tell. But this notion of walking away is supported by a transformation which has gone on now for some time led by the conservative Republican base that the Europeans are cheating us that the Europeans are exploitative. It's kind of a strange um rendition of economics from a kind of moralizing perspective which used to be dismissed here as oldfashioned and not hard-headed but you actually see it uh here. I'll give you a couple of examples. Mr. Trump has economic adviserss. I know some of them like Scott Bent or Mr. Navaro and some of the others. Okay, they apparently have told him something which if they said it in a seminar among economists, they'd be laughed out of the room. But they have said it to him that if there's a trade imbalance, in other words, if uh I'll pick a country, Vietnam sends a hundred billion dollar worth of cheap clothing to the United States, but only buys $40 billion worth of whatever it gets from the this is a sign of cheating. Now, not only is it a sign of cheating, but it's a sign of cheating by the government of Vietnam. So when I hear this and I explain to my audiences here in America that the decision to produce clothing in Vietnam was made in many cases by American corporations moving production from China where the wages had risen to Vietnam where they hadn't yet and that therefore this was a profitdriven and profitgenerating decision made by American corporations whose headquarters are in Washington down the street that you are blaming on the Vietnamese government. That makes no sense. That's ignorant and you're not an ignorant person. What is this? Well, I think you have to go then to the ideology. It's just they need to re reposi it. This is dangerous, but let me give you the example that will help people understand it. Why do we have in the United States over recent years a resurgence of white supremacy? I don't know if you caught the theater with Mr. Ramaposa from South Africa visiting Mr. Trump and being shown a phony movie about white cemeteries in his country. Why would we have a resurgence? Well, the answer is that white people have suffered because they had the bulk of the jobs that were relocated out of the United States for the last 30 to 40 years. Those were high-paying unionized manufacturing jobs and those had gone to white people out of the discriminatory structure of American society. So they they suffered when those jobs were exported. About the same time, we had the upsurge of both black people and brown people and women in America fighting against their secondass situation in this country which is very old and very deeply rooted. So the the whites who were hurt by losing their jobs had to be witness to all kinds of special programs developed by the government trying to cope with the radicalization of black, brown, and women protesting against their political and ideological subordination. So it was childishly easy for the demagogic MAGA types to tell the white people, you have been hurt not by the profit-driven decision of your employer to pay Chinese workers instead of you. No, no, no. You have been hurt by the favoritism shown by the Democratic Party to black people, brown people, and women. And you have every right to be angry. Look at Mr. Trump dismantling the DEI programs in this country. Diversity, equality, and inclusion. what those letters that that's the game. That's how he's president. He thinks and of course he believes all of this. His demagoguery is effective because he includes himself in the people who believe all of this stuff. He really is racially prejudiced and all of that as are most of the people around him. So they are capable of figuring out a social problem in the United States. Horrible social divisions between blacks and browns and black and brown and white and male and female which are in very bad shape. My wife's a psychotherapist. I can assure you her clients are a cross-section of Americans who are finding personally it's difficult to live in this society given the stresses, the strains and the pressures that are not being resolved at all and explain the vitriolic language. Listen to Mr. Trump. He is a good representative of the anger and the bitterness. Well, they see the Europeans as more weight to carry, more uselessness. We're better than them. We are more technically advanced. We have a much better military. They don't even have a a decent mil. You know, it's just Oh, and you'll see if Mr. Trump withdraws, he will, you'll see it very quickly. Blame the loss of Ukraine on the Europeans 100. I guarantee it to you. He because he will blame whatever happens on the designated losers. He c he can never criticize capital or capitalism or capitalists. That's why he cannot acknowledge that half of the stuff that comes into the US from China is coming from subsidiaries of American business there. He he has to say things they all do. They stole the technology. They didn't. The Chinese made a very calculated deal. You, you Americans or Japanese or German or Dutch, it doesn't matter. You can come to China. You can hire our disciplined labor force for a small fraction of what you pay at home. and we will give you access to the Chinese market, which is now the largest and fastest growing market in the world. Well, I've taught in business schools. That's what we teach entrepreneurs. Go where the wages are low and the market is growing, of course. and they went to China because that's where it's happening to turn around and then when the Chinese say uh okay we're going to give you the labor force and we're going to give you a market access you have to share your technology that was a deal many American corporations were happy to agree to happy they could continue to develop the technology They wouldn't have to slow down. They'd have to give what's already known anyway to the Chinese in exchange for staggering improvements in pro in profitability, which is why so many of them went. But notice the logic. This story, if you were to tell it to the American people, they kind of know it. They really do. But it's not a story that can be told. You know, it's it's like our sex lives. We all kind of know what that's about, but we have an agreement not to discuss this. So, we talk instead about the Chinese stealing techn fantastic. Plays right in to the notion of evil and bad and communist and all the rest of it. And so you don't have to really think about what you're doing or why you're doing it. And of course, you can't stop it. That's the problem. You you can't stop the process because you cannot allow yourself to think about it in a reasonable way. There's a really fascinating article I would recommend written by Edward Lutvak Lutak in back in 1994. It's called why fascism is the wave of the future. And it is interesting because the point of departure is you know the neoliberal era which really took off throughout the 80s and and then in the early 90s instead of beginning to calm it down and uh restoring some social responsibility of the state like preventing you know key jobs from leaving uh you know ensuring that capital was uh you know still harmonized with the interest of labor. all of this went went out the window and he said with this globalized market and new technologies coming uh you know the gel shaft would effectively tear away the gain shaft. So anyways, his his whole point was uh you know the that the government's no longer the US government trying didn't try to prevent the export of its uh uh key manufacturing jobs and uh you know under the neoliberal dogma the maximizing market efficiency meant that yeah the e economy would be driven and the again the society was a mere appendage nothing to be taken into account. So uh so this was quite predictable. Well, what would happen if you let the the main companies just export any job they want or you know they have no more loyalties effectively to the society which where they reside and they you know you would end up in a situation where the coast the west coast and east coast of America where the tech and finance all are they would you know they would thrive on the globalization as you said they can export you know the manufacturing jobs to the cheapest possible place while the Americans working in industry you know they would not only end up in lower paid job lower skilled jobs not just the money, but also the social standing. You know, if you make a car, this is the, you know, part of the whole American culture. Now you're going to stand in the, you know, at Kmart at the checkout, it's not the same. So, you're destroying people's pride, their economy. And, you know, the whole idea that humans are not just numbers, they're actual people. So, no, I very much agree. You have a huge complexity and instead of revisiting the past 40 years of neoliberal economics, that the Chinese took our jobs, they stole our technologies. this I mean all this nonsense which does make any sense but it does sell much better than discussing the you know the difficulties and complexities of capitalism and indeed the yeah human nature which has which can't really be resolved. So um anyways let me let me let me add one dimension here that here's the irony of it all. It is the struggle between capital and labor. You know, Giannis Varufakus says this and it's very important. He's right. It is the struggle between capital and labor. It is the struggle. It is Marxist class struggle that in the end is shaping all of this. What happened in the United States in this last century begins and is always driven by the stunning reality of the 1930s. Europeans somehow and when I meet with them they either don't know the history or they don't give it the weight they ought to. In the 1930s when capitalism globally collapses in 1929 and we have the the horror of everything that unfolded in the 30s, the American working class lurched to the left. It lurch it joined in huge numbers trade unions. It was the greatest unionization in American history. Never had anything like it before. They have never had anything like it since. You ended up with a third of the labor force in unions and they were powerful unions in all the basic industries. The CIO it was called. And you had hundreds of thousands of people joining two large socialist parties and one large communist party. And they were powerful enough all working together. the socialists, the communists, and the labor unions, despite all their disagreements and troubles, they worked together, and they were incredible. They went to the president and they basically said, "You have to do something in this great depression. You really have to do something or else it's going to be a revolution here." and and Roosevelt, the president, a centrist Democrat rather like, you know, Bill Clinton or someone like that, understood that he was talking to his voters and the communists didn't hesitate. They said, "You you either give us something or we'll vote you right out of here. you'll be gone because you have to be better than the Republicans or else we have no reason and we will we'll make our own party. So he gave them in very for short time the social security system. We had never had that in this country. A state pension, a minimum wage that was decent. We never had that before. Uh an unemployment program. If you lose your job, you immediately get money for a year or two. And finally, public employment, 15 million jobs. I mean, and all of this cost a fortune. And the government had no money because it was a depression. And businesses weren't paying taxes, consumers weren't paying taxes, and workers were out of work and paying no taxes. So, he had to go to the rich, which he did. He went big taxes and big borrowing. and he borrowed to take care of the mass of people to give them a check for nothing because they were old or they were unemployed. It's capitalism's anathema. It it is. And when the war is over and the president who did this is dead and the Nazis are defeated, there has been one objective hammered home in the ruling class of this country. undo the New Deal, cancel all of it, not just get rid of the public employment, which they did. Not all, but drop the minimum wage so it becomes meaningless through inflation. Do the same with social security. Do the That's all they've been doing. And they trained the government to be the government that does nothing. that it's the old less a fair don't intervene don't well of course they meant don't do anything leftist they had a long list of what the government should do for them most of which is the cold war and gets justified around that but that that's why they that's why the ruling class was able to say now we want to be neoliberal we want you to get rid of tariffs and get rid because we're the number one country we can do the this. But it comes out of the class struggle and the very myopic inability that we started today not able to see is because your ability to reason has been overwhelmed by the ideological crusade that has governed American culture since 1945. But it doesn't even have to be that ideological. you know back in the I think it was 1817 or 20 David Ricardo one of the you know pillars of of economic liberalism he made you know the observation which had you know surprised him that you know with every technological innovation which incre increases productivity uh the vast majority of the um the gains would go to capital owner and he made the point that sometimes even the labor would actually be weakened given that the relative power between capital and labor would shift and again this is this is one of the liberal economists you know but also you know from Adam Smith to John Stewart Mill they all also they also recognize that the development or emergence of the rent seeker would also be you know destructive and you know not good but these days when they talk about left and right and capitalism it it it's all following this very strange political dogmas which uh yeah doesn't really have that much uh empirical more sub substance substance behind it. So it's um it's very strange to watch. Uh it is a ve it is I think as many people feel a very strange time in which the disconnect between what our leaders are talking about and our felt sense of what's unfolding are so disconnected that you really kind of wonder where you are and how to interpret what's going on. And you know what that does? It makes programs like yours all the more important. No, it really does. These conversations have to be had. And you know, you and a dozen others who are doing this are the only hope that there is a a rational conversation. Look how frustrated. It's interesting that he comes up so often, but how frustrated Yiannis Varuvak is because I know you know him. you know how he gets often in his interviews when he looks at the reporter and he can't quite believe you know really that that's what you think is going on and he has to be polite but well on that very flattering note uh we can end it there so thank you again I always love speaking with you so same here same here and I meant it too I really appreciate what you do I think it's an enormously valuable contribution Well, thanks again. I appreciate it.