Welcome back to the program. We are here
with Professor Richard Wolf to discuss
some of the economic problems uh across
the west. Uh so thank you as always for
coming back on. Um we see these problems
uh they can no longer really be denied
but uh as we see these issues such as
the lack of competitiveness, economic
inequality
uh that is at the domestic level at the
international level we see relative
decline. Uh but what is interesting
though is all of these economic problems
they have a way of impacting both uh
societal stability as well as political
stability. Now if we I guess start off
looking at the European Union, how do
you expect these uh growing economic
problems which we are now seeing to
cause uh some social and political
disruption?
Well, it seems to me that the writing,
proverbial or not, is on the wall. Uh, I
think you're seeing in Europe something
quite similar to what we have here in
the United States. I'm speaking to you
from uh New York City where I live and
work. Uh, put in a nutshell, it goes
something like this.
The underlying
core of a modern capitalist economy,
which is a mixture of
manufacturing of goods and, if you allow
me, the manufacturing of services that
accompany the goods
is in decline,
has been in decline for quite some time
now. By me by that I mean some decades
of time
and
it has led to all kinds of crises
that are consistent with an growing
imbalance.
[clears throat] Excuse me if you if you
understand me.
uh between
the reality of the economic system and
the financial symbolism
built up on top of it.
And so what we have is a government
which provides ever more enormous flows
of liquidity
literally and I mean it creating money
[clears throat] and distributing it in
its usual forms
which are mostly uh government budget
deficits paid for by printing the money
as you have your financial government
authority purchasing the debt issued by
the rest of the government authority.
Um, you do that in Europe, we do that
here.
Pouring all that money in to the
economic system
then confronts
the fact that the older capitalist
system of exploding production of goods
and services, globalizing them.
All of that is no longer happening here.
[clears throat]
It has moved. It always moved. It moved
from England to Europe. It moved from
Europe through colonialism
everywhere in the world.
And eventually the industrial core of
the economy likewise moved uh often at
by the decisions made by the
corporations that had developed in
England and Europe and so on. So that
now they're concentrated in China,
India, Brazil and and all of that. So
where does the money go?
Well, part of it goes to build over
there,
but the political problems of over there
put limits on how much of that can come
from the west.
So the image I want to give you is where
does the money go? Literally how does
the economy absorb
the flow of money?
And the answer again simplifying
is the money flows into that one part of
the economy
where inflation
the result of all this money with no
addition of goods. The one place where
an inflation is celebrated as a success
rather than viewed as a sign of
imbalance.
And that place is called the stock
market.
The money flows in and then there begins
to be a selfreinforcing
lunatic cycle
in which the money goes in and achieves
for those who are already in the market
capital gains. as the flow of money
comes in and is not particularly matched
by an equivalent flow of securities. So
the value of the securities is bid up.
What that does is create an incentive
for ne the next wave of money coming
into the economy to likewise go into the
stock market because the rate of
improvement in the value of your wealth
is greater in the stock market than in
anything else you have an opportunity to
invest in.
And so you have the classic
situation of a self-reinforcing
investment bubble.
And we're seeing that globally now
because our economy is global in a way
it never was before. So I can tell you
I'm not surprised that the stock market
in Europe, most of them, and the stock
market in the United States are enjoying
the same weird explosion in in the midst
of economic difficulty.
And this has had
cataclysmic
consequences. I I there is no way to
exaggerate this. I'll give you just
major examples. Number one,
it has prevented the West, and by that I
mean Europe and North America and
perhaps Japan.
It has prevented them from understanding
and accepting until now
dangerous all of this is. They were
unable to see what was going on in
China. For for example, China's
industrialization
is now at least 30 years old.
There was a blindness
to what this meant. What the Chinese
were able to do
simply happened out of the picture, off
the radar, somewhere in a place where it
didn't matter that literally everything
in the way of manufacturing was being
brought there like a vacuum cleaner
pulls the dust out of a rug.
it was somehow not registered
and it made the the country blind even
to those developments that happened at
home.
30 years ago, Detroit, Michigan was the
center of the American automobile
industry. It was the most successful
example of modern industrial capitalism
the world had. Visitors to the United
States would be taken by the president
to Detroit where he could the visitor
could see all of the factories. All of
the workers, even black American
workers, had good jobs, were able to
send their children to colleges and
afford a home and an automobile and all
the rest. over the last 30 years that
China explodes,
Detroit becomes a disaster.
I visited Detroit not too long ago and
I'm talking about a city where half of
the homes are abandoned.
This large parts of the city look like a
very weird version of the Gaza Strip or
of bombed out Dresden at the end of
World War II. you know, buildings that
half of them have had fires, so they're
partly burnt out. They're collapsed.
That extraordinary.
Yes, you have a downtown that has been
redeveloped with big hotels and fancy
restaurants, but if you walk five
minutes from your hotel where I was, you
will you see what the rest of the city
looks like. But somehow this could go on
year after year for 30 years and there's
still today no recognition. What does it
mean that the city is a small shell of
itself and the people by the way the
population in 1980 the population is one
and three/4 million people. The
population of Detroit today is 700,000
people. The majority of the people left.
That's like Ukraine. People leaving the
country and most of them will never come
back. I mean th this is not a a
downturn. This is a catastrophe.
But you would look long and hard very
very difficult. Slowly,
by the way, this morning, and I believe
it's for the first time, a woman was
inaugurated as the new mayor of Detroit,
a black woman.
Likewise, the city of Syracuse, a black
woman became mayor. The city of Albany
in New York, an important city, the the
the capital of the state of New York, a
black woman. These little signs are
signs of a population beginning to find
ways to express its horror.
Not just at what happened,
but this weird combination of an
evolution economically
that is so overlaid with ideological
pretense that people are behaving now
like those who wake up from a long
sleep, where by long I mean for years,
and are now almost coming to terms with
all that has changed. But the only odd
thing is they weren't asleep. They were
awake all the time and living through
it.
We had a we inaugurated a a Muslim
socialist as the mayor of New York City.
This yesterday, you know, everybody's
trying to figure out what that means.
Did the people of New York vote for
socialism? Of course not. Not at all.
To be honest, most of the people in New
York couldn't tell you what socialism
is. That's the level of ideological
repression that we have all lived
through. I've lived all my life. I'm
born in Ohio. Lived here all my life.
And I always am amazed because of my
European background by the absence of a
of an awareness. The repression of the
left after World War II meant that none
of this could be spoken.
So there is now this blindness
and the anxiety and the people in New
York they voted and this is very
important. They voted against modern
western capitalism.
They might not use the word, although
that word is more in use in America
today than it has been in my lifetime,
but they are whether they use the word
or not, they are voting against the
status quo. And if you are a young
Muslim socialist, let's go and try that
because what we have is utterly
unacceptable.
If you want to use different language,
and I say this having thought about it a
lot,
we are in a pre-revolutionary
moment,
and I think it it includes Europe, in
which very difficult realities that have
been obliterated by a by a a brilliant
Madison Avenue ideological
program for the last 75 years is now
exhausted and the reality is becoming
palpable and there's no way to handle it
because they've been so busy pretending
they have no idea what to do in this
circumstance. And the old socialism
is coming back because
for the generation that's just
discovering it, it's a very interesting
and attractive collection of ideas. It's
remarkable to live through this.
Well, the United States uh obviously you
see a lot of the same problems as you do
in Europe. I think pre-revolutionary
moment is a good way of describing it.
What what we're seeing now that is uh
the institutions have become seen as
illegitimate. The political leadership
illegitimate, the media illegitimate.
Essentially they uh you can't have a
functioning society without them. But uh
they're not living up to the role they
were supposed to have. But in some ways
the European situation seems
uh a bit more problematic because in
Europe we we're used to having
governments providing all these uh
social goods, all these welfare states,
uh the long holidays, uh early
retirement age, all of these things.
However,
uh over the past years now, uh we've
heard that uh well, we can't afford the
welfare state anymore. Now we need the
warfare state. So to prepare oursel for
this violent world ahead of us. So the
Russians will you know come for us and
the Americans will leave all of this uh
all of this stuff. But uh overall it is
an interesting
uh trap anyways for the Europeans
because what happens when uh the
governments claim they can't afford to
keep the welfare there either it's for
lack of economic competitiveness or
you or just uh other priorities for how
to use the taxpayers money. So um how do
you see the European situation being
worse than an American in this in this
regard? Yes. And I I do because I think
that the European situation is worse
overall than the United States. We still
have in the United States thanks to the
last 75 years of what was in effect a
global uh US empire
situation. We have accumulated uh
resources and accumulated industries
which the Chinese are now challenging at
every stage. and and going beyond what
the United States can do in a number. I
was caught this morning when I read that
the BYD corporation in China, which is
its number one electric vehicle
manufacturer, it has quite a few of
them, but that's the number one, uh,
just this 2025 announced it sold more
electric vehicles than Tesla around the
world. Okay, this is just another in an
endless flow of documentation
of where the center of world capitalism
has shifted to. Uh and and it and and I
I don't use the word capitalism lightly.
I use it in the very precise sense of
the organization of enterprise such that
there's a small group of people who are
the board of directors or whatever you
want to call them and a mass of people
who are the employees. If you choose to
organize your enterprises in that way,
then for me you have broken from slavery
which has masters and slaves or
feudalism which has lords and serfs and
you've adopted for the capitalist
arrangement of employer employee. Those
are different from one another, but they
are what I understand these words uh to
mean. I have no objection to China
calling itself socialist, but it's a
kind of socialism like you're familiar
with in uh Scandinavia in which the
enterprises remain
a largely privatelyowned and operated
and b almost universally employer
employee internal organization.
uh th that for me means that this system
whose origin is England, whose
development is the rest of the world has
now ended up or at least at our stage
highly concentrated
uh in the far east of this planet and
everybody else is adjusting to that
arrangement. the United States is still
able to conduct a certain level of real
competition with China. And I make it I
mean to simplify
I don't think Europe is I think what has
happened in Europe is that the same
forces that created China and the United
States on one end have left Europe in by
far the number three position. And let
let me tell you what one of the
implications of all of this is that
here in the United States there's a
growing sense
that the decisions
of the United States government in terms
of basically breaking the alliance with
Europe, letting all of that go.
um looking upon Europe as
at best
a way to gain resources that will enable
a better struggle with China
and that therefore, you know,
Vanderlayan has to commit to purchase
$750 billion worth of liqufied natural
gas over the next 10 years. has to agree
that Europe, which is the most amazing
thing to me, Europe is going to invest,
believing the same number, 750 billion
here in the United States.
What a spectacle. You're going to in
Europe cut back money for the social
welfare of the European masses
while you are taking that money that
might have gone to them and shipping it
to the United States.
No politician that I can imagine can
survive doing that.
So what is going on here? has to be a
charade.
And it begins to make sense when you put
it together with the fetishized hysteria
about Russia,
which I find, you know, astonishing.
Here in the United States, the leader of
the Cold War making arrangements with
Russia is really the dominant view.
Russia isn't a big scary anything here.
It was, but it isn't anymore.
In Europe, this survives,
and it survives with heightened
intensity.
It gives the excuse to Mr. Merittz to
spend a huge amount of money on
militarization on on building the
military in Germany. Well, whatever for
you're not going to catch up with the
United States. You haven't the money.
Meritz is proud. He's going to spend 80
or 800 billion dollars in 10 years. The
United States spends that in one year.
You're not going to catch up. China and
Russia together, you're not going to
catch up. Hasn't the Ukraine war kind of
shown you that if you needed it? Well,
then what is going on? Well, here is the
darkest view
that comes out of my experience here.
That Mr. Mertz is what he was, an
employee of Black Rockck.
And the plan is
to milk Europe for as much as you can
get out of them.
Play a game. I'll lower the tariff if
you send me wealth.
and I'll tell you what wealth I need and
I tell you what forms it'll take and
we'll make some plans and they'll all be
here in the United States based on our
strategic calculations
and you're going to have to forget about
your welfare program
and what you're going to need to do
is rely on one of you
to be the repressive force.
for the whole continent
and that's going to be Germany
and the Germans will become the allies
of the United States to make all this
happen. Not Britain, Germany.
not the idea of the AngloAmerican
alliance,
but something a lot closer to, if you
allow me, the dre that was in the minds
of the folks in Germany before 1933.
That's a very dark image, but it makes
more sense if you try to put together
the anomalous
behavior.
Now, the Germans cannot catch up. They
will not catch up. But that will be okay
because they can take their money and
they can buy the weapons that the
Americans will be happy to provide them
with. So we get the resources
that we need. It'll be portrayed as an
equal exchange.
We will US will send sell you the
weapons you need.
and you will send us the money we demand
and we'll do what we have already done
for half a century. We'll send you the
weapons that are obsolete
because we've replaced them with new
ones.
And after all, you don't need the latest
because you can't fight with us anyway.
that will be adequate to what your
assignment will be.
I may be wrong. I'm obviously
speculating,
but my speculation makes more sense of
what is going on than anything I have
been able to find anywhere else.
And I know among the people you
interview that I have made use of to get
to where I'm talking to you now are for
example people like Giannis Varu Fakis
and others who are in their way
approaching something similar.
>> I think the overall concern of Germany
is uh growing as well. This uh the
tremendous well transformation we see
now of Germany is quite extraordinary.
Uh but on on Europe though the
well if you would compare it to the
United States the problems that are
ahead uh Europe and US are not the same
kind of actor indeed when we say Europe
Russia is onethird of Europe so that's
not really Europe we're talking about
the European Union but even the European
Union is not really a very cohesive
entity of power and indeed it seems that
a lot of the crisis we're facing now is
used uh as an excuse as an opportunity
to centralize power. I think most people
watching uh Wonderland would reach this
conclusion, but uh it's uh so the United
States at least will be able to hold
this um internal cohesion probably
better than the than the EU given that
it's an actual state as opposed to the
EU which is always faced with this um
contradiction that it's the crisis that
allows it to centralize power. But in
the in the crisis, the EU doesn't seem
to thrive. If anything in crisis the EU
allows itself to be taken advantage of
as we've seen as you mentioned with the
United States. So you think it's going
to be possible though for the Europeans
to have any cohesion in the time forward
because or you know just related to what
you said about Germany this is this new
militarized Germany who's that's just
focused on acquiring more weapons to
wage war. This is this is very this is
not the Germany that uh uh Europe grew
up on over the past 80 years. There's
going to be a lot of uh concerns about
this even from some of its close allies.
I hope so. uh because this is not a
direction that you want anyone including
the Germans to pursue but given their
history especially not the Germans. Uh
let me respond as follows. I agree with
you the dis
the divisions in Europe are
extraordinary. For those of us in
America watching, the display of of the
entire year just passed, the year 2025,
looked from here to be a concerted
effort, I would even use the word a
desperate effort to get unanimity around
taking the Russian assets that were
deposited in in Belgium there uh and
using them as the collateral. for a
loan, a massive loan to Ukraine to keep
that desperately losing war going
another year or two.
Anyone who imagined that that amount of
money could do more than that is, in my
judgment, dreaming.
But we watched as meeting after meeting
Starmer Macron Merz Maloney who whoever
they could get uh to visit with Zalinski
and promise and yes and we'll do this
and first we'll take the interest on the
loan on that money that we're earning
and then we'll take the whole principle
and then they couldn't do it. They
couldn't they couldn't overcome the
opposition of Belgium or of Hungary or
of the Czech Republic. They couldn't
uh that was the public opposition. I am
aware of opposition very strong but not
public in several other European. So it
they couldn't they simply there was no
way it would be the end of the of NATO.
it be the end of of the European Union
or or something very dangerously close
to that. So yeah, the divisions are
catastrophic and the irony of that, you
know, the irony that nationalism was
such a valuable
mechanism for the transition out of
feudalism in Europe. Remember the Holy
Roman Empire that was once Europe.
Europe has been unified. The division,
the breakup of Europe into all the
little feudal monarchies that then had
to be violently brought together, Bismar
in Germany, uh you know, the the Cavore,
Matsini, the others in Italy and so on.
uh this nationalism
which was
the savior of the transition to
capitalism now becomes the albatross
becomes the weight dragging Europe under
into irrelevance. It it is a fantastic
lesson for how one set of institutions
can be progressive in one situation and
regressive uh in another.
But I would like to add another thing.
The unity of the United States is less
than it has been in my lifetime.
Far less.
This has to be the spectacle of a Mr.
Trump as president and Mr. Mani as the
mayor of New York ought to give you some
sense. Uhoh,
things are very very different. Our
culture here and not just our political
culture but all of our culture.
I I I don't know if your your audience
keeps up on this, but one of the
extraordinary acts of Mr. Trump
was to take over, demand and to take
over the Kennedy Memorial Center for the
Arts, which is a huge institution in
Washington DC that is to be the artistic
celebration of American artistic talent
and it has been a showcase for artists
from around the world. But it's sort of
America's commitment, right? It's called
the Kennedy Memorial Center. Mr. Trump
demanded
that the name be first of all he fired
all of the people who run that replace
them with his own appointees
and then demanded that his appointees
change the name so it now reads the
Trump-
Kennedy Center for the Arts. Okay, we
are now watching this is only a few
weeks old. So in those weeks
performer after performer cancels their
their show. They won't go. The singers
don't. The the dramatic artists don't.
The sculptors don't. Nobody. I mean a
few will. He had to go and find two or
three because they were all cancelling.
and he had to go find, which is not
easy, the rightwing
uh artists that he could bring so that
the concerts wouldn't be empty, that
there would be nothing going on there,
which was what is now happening. And it
turned out
that America's artists, which will
should come as no surprise, are not Mr.
Trump's fans that don't like anything
about what and they are now willing to
to to take steps that are hurtful to
their careers. They are going to be
hurt.
But you you're at a moment where it's
not clear
for many artists who are not all that
progressive,
they now are having to face a new
situation.
And when I tell you this, I think you'll
get an idea of what's happening. There
is the the calculation they have to make
is which is more damaging to my career
to go and give the concert and make the
whole left of America hate me
or to not go and make the MAGA Trump
people hate. That's a divided society.
That's a society in which the division
is becoming urgent about each person's
situation and you're finding that almost
almost everywhere.
Well, we have a authoritarian uh
development here in Europe as well. As
you probably if you followed my my
channel, I often interviewed a Swiss
colonel uh Jac Buu who is well he's a
colonel with Swiss intelligence. He used
to work with NATO. Uh so anyways,
the problem he has now is that as he
analyzes the Ukraine war, he has reached
the wrong conclusions. That is it's not
an unprovoked war. H this path to peace
is not simply to fight to the last
Ukrainian. So essentially it's someone
who desented. The EU decided that this
is pro-Russian to question the policies
of NATO and the EU. So they put sanction
on him and given that he lives in
Brussels, he his bank accounts are
frozen. He can't buy food. Uh he's they
yeah they're they're essentially
destroying him. Uh this is what happened
to Descent. Uh so it's it's not uh it's
not a great time here either, but I'm
assuming as well that this isn't going
to be the end of the road. It feels like
uh uh instead a precedent being set that
this is now how our citizens will be
treated. Um but we we have it also I I
want you to understand it is now and
this was a remarkable event in 2025.
I think the perception in the United
States changed around a new special
police force that Trump created. It's
called ICE ICE and it its ostensible
purpose was to facilitate the
deportation
of undocumented
immigrants with criminal records.
Across the year, it became crystal clear
that it had many other functions beside
that. A small percentage of the people
it arrested had any criminal record. A
significant number weren't even
immigrants, let alone. So, but the
perception changed by the end of the
year.
the I would say the perception in
America was anti-ICE
whereas the during the first half of the
year it was either pro-ICE or neutral
about it all. Uh the the spectacle of
ICE agents throwing students to the
ground or abusing older women in who are
shopping in a mall somewhere.
And even the Supreme Court at the end of
the year issued against Trump that he
can't use troops in Los Angeles, uh,
Portland, and Chicago. Uh, which was
another spectacle of American military
invading their own cities. So, he has he
has his work cut out. Mr. Trump in the
year 2026 is going to in my judgment
be engaged in two activities.
one to repress all of this and number
two to deflect the consciousness
out of a bad American domestic situation
onto foreign adventures and that
Venezuela should give you some idea or
bombing a village in Nigeria should give
you some idea. renewing horrors in in
the Middle East, some idea, and maybe
doing something unspeakably stupid in
Taiwan. Uh, but that's what's left to
him. In one year, he has dissipated an
enormous
amount of support and he he is not a a
leader who can handle it very well.
Let me ask a question about economic
decline and uh war because uh well first
let me just say on this channel as well
I had General Harl Kuyat. He was the
former head of the German armed forces
and he held the highest position
military position in NATO. I he warned
very strongly against uh some of the
narratives built up around the Ukraine
war and he yeah essentially he argued
that it was a mistake to sabotage the
Istanbul agreement all of all of these
things. But three years ago he wrote an
article or gave an interview in which he
warned back in January of 2023 that uh
the war has pretty much already been
predetermined. We're going to lose this
war. This was back when everyone was uh
well, it was obligatory to say that we
were winning, but he was predicting that
we will lose this war. When it's being
lost, the Americans will then withdraw
and uh leave it on the Europeans. And at
this point in time, the Germans would
face a very angry Russia all by itself.
Uh so I thought this was quite a
magnificent prediction three years ago,
especially by the head of the German
armed forces. now. But but there seems
to be a different um sentiment now
across Europe. This the unwillingness to
end the war. Everyone now recognizes I
think that Europeans are the main
spoilers. Only a few days ago, the
Swedish defense minister said that we
cannot afford to end the war in Ukraine,
peace peace will be a bad thing because
if peace breaks out, the Russians could
deploy more troops in the Baltic Sea
region. Uh but prime minister of Denmark
said something similar as well. So uh so
yeah, we have to keep the war going in
Ukraine to distract the Russians from
from uh taking re revenge on us because
we've been using the Ukrainians as a
proxy against them essentially. Now, but
be beyond all of this the con d d d d d
d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d
consequence of the war we also see that
there's some economic
uh consequences though that is it's
easier to explain the dramatic decline
in the standard of living if we can
blame the war and the Russians but how
else though do you see this yeah a
growing economic crisis creating this uh
incentives for wararm mongering among
the political class
>> well I think the way I read what they do
This is the desperate effort of people
whose political
relevance and their political careers
are coming to an end. I mean let's let's
be very blunt. These are the people
whose career has been from day one a
subordination
of their country of their lives to the
United States. You have been the junior
partner of the main player in the world
economy. You allowed the United States
to operate as the hegeimon
and you cheered them on. The United
States has moved on to a different
position. It doesn't it thinks it's got
more to gain by squeezing wealth out of
you than by any it doesn't feel that
you're not a useful ally.
They understand that the war if the war
comes between I'm overdoing it but just
to symbolically to get you to see the
message. If war comes it will be between
the United States and Russia and China
and the missiles will fly over Europe
but they won't stop at Europe. They
don't need to. That's not where the Now
they may choose to.
If I were a European, I would be very
worried that the next step is to do to
all of Europe what was done in Ukraine.
So we can now have a proxy war in which
the east and the west fight it out to
the last European.
Yeah, that might happen.
But no one in Russia is not going to
fight with Germany. It makes no sense.
The again if you understand that NATO
was moving east that Russia couldn't
prevent it until it could and when it
could it did and that's what Ukraine is
then I think you'll see more the
likelihood that these politicians have
nowhere else to go if they admitted that
Russia doesn't show any signs of wanting
or needing to invade Europe. What in the
world? For you want five Ukraine?
Russia can't handle five Ukraine. Can't
even handle two.
The the image of them looking for an
opportunity
makes no sense to nobody except
politicians who have to
make their whole lives which has been
anti-Russian,
anti-Sviet,
constantly
fighting that war over and over again.
That's their career. They they sink with
it. They rose with it. They're going to
die with it. And if there comes a time
that they have to cut back on social
welfare the way we see them already
doing,
then they are going to be tasked with
you, the mass of the of the Europeans.
You subordinated us. They'll be blamed
to the United States. And you didn't
even have the courage to see what was
coming. and you didn't do anything about
it and now
to to have some military you're you're
you're taking it out on us. We are going
to pay. Oh no. Oh no. We're not going to
let you do that. And that at that point
they will have to say one way or another
that we don't believe or we don't care
what you're saying to us about Russia
because
Russia is a a threat of what might be.
You are actually damaging us every day
by what you're doing to pensions or or
or medical systems and all the rest of
what you're talking about. I I don't
think that's viable. I think the the
hysteria against Russia is so
far-fetched.
I mean, our leading politicians here,
our leading antis-siet, anti-Russian,
anti- socialist politicians
don't talk like that anymore. Even they
find the Europeans odd in this regard.
Really odd.
Are they still yet? Yes. Because their
their political lives were the same.
They grew up in the anti-communist cold
war and they too are wondering about
what's going to be said about them. All
the things they said and did to justify
all of that. They're in trouble. And
they're in trouble politically here
because all of those efforts by all of
those people against Mandani and the
others all failed.
Michael Bloomberg, your classic American
mayor of former mayor of New York,
billionaire, spent $9.5 million publicly
admitted to stop Mum Donnie. Couldn't do
it. Made no difference. None. Even among
the huge Jewish population in New York
City, every effort,
by the way, Mamani has been crystal
clear. He was asked when he was running
what he would do if Benjamin Netanyahu
visited New York and his answer carried
across the newspapers was, "I would have
him arrested."
Right? He got the Jewish community voted
for him also.
I mean, and Bloomberg, who is Jewish,
couldn't stop it. Couldn't stop it.
Yeah, it's a good um indication that uh
something is uh is going very wrong when
uh as you said with the well when the US
can essentially put the squeeze on the
Europeans to tell them to not trade so
much with China and Russia only the
United States squeeze its industries to
relocate to the US uh squeeze the EU to
invest its uh profits in the US and
still the the EU does what it's told. Uh
it's been uh yeah put in the very
>> but that's why you have to have you have
giving away everything in that way to
the United States as the United States
disavows you.
That's an impossible political uh
program unless it is accompanied by a
hysterical
anti-Russian
propaganda that involves doing to your
Swiss intelligence fellow there what you
describe. They have to do that kind of
behavior because that's they're
desperate. It's like the United States
and I and this is very important.
A few months ago, Mr. Trump figured out
enough of this. He has to begin to
distract people from the domestic
crisis of of American capitalism, which
is severe.
And so he began killing random fishermen
in boats in the Caribbean.
Right. No trial, no arrest. For years,
American naval shipping would
occasionally board a boat to see if it
was carrying illegal material. And if it
was, they confiscated the material. They
arrested the people and took them back
to wherever they came from. Suddenly,
this program isn't adequate. We're gonna
No lawyer, no arrest, no nothing. Just
kill them immediately. Shoot them. Kill
them. And if a few survive, go kill
them. What? Why? Why would it? It cannot
affect the drugs. Most of the drugs we
care about don't come from Venezuela.
they come a different route. It it's all
silly. So what is it? It has no
substantive re. Ah it's part of the we
are not we're going to bomb Nigeria.
We're going to bomb. It's the way that
the government found to shut down
pro-Palestinian
demonstrations across America as the
young people particularly in
universities were overwhelmingly
pro Palestinian.
This was squashed and they found an
argument anti-semitism
a problem that has existed in America
for a long time but is less of a problem
now than it has ever been. They revived
this make believe in order to squash and
that worked. So they are now doing the
same thing with imaginary drugs from an
imaginary source and they can make life
difficult for Mr. Maduro and they can
get commitments out of him, which is
what this is for, to give them access to
oil and so forth on a preferential
scale, not to give it to China, etc.,
etc. That's all this is about. This is a
faint designed to focus out as he
squashes or tries to the domestic
disscent that and that's what we're
going to see in 2026. But I I I don't
think it's all that different from your
situation. I don't I think you're going
to have to squash dissent. You're going
to have to squash two kinds of dissent.
The growing realization that Russia is
not the problem you were led to believe
it was. And I I'm no defender of Russia.
I'm no fan of Mr. Putin. None of that.
But just realistically looking at it.
But the even greater threat will be
inside the European countries from the
mobilization of labor and the left
against the destruction of the welfare
state. It's one thing to be asked to
join in a hysteria against Russia that
is mostly verbiage. It's something else.
to be unable to send your child to the
university or to be unable to recover
from a catastrophic illness, etc., etc.
And I think that's where that's where
the rubber meets the road. That's where
the real fight will be. And we're going
to have that in this country as well.
>> I think what's unique about the Ukraine
war as well is that given we're losing
the war, uh, our leaders won't be able
to write the history thereafter. And uh
once all of the lies are exposed then
one thing after another all the things
they said were Russian propaganda uh
from NATO's involvement to the
corruption issues like one after the
other is proving to be true. So I think
uh once all the lies are exposed uh
people will then have some more
questions. What happened to our
economies? Why did we have to fight to
the last Ukraine? And all of these
things will come up and I think
accountability will be demanded. But um
uh yeah, that kind of takes me nicely to
my last question though. If this is a
pre-revolutionary moment, what would a
revolution across the West actually look
like? Uh is it a rejection or toppling
of the political class, the the system?
Is it the
the media elites? Uh the main
institutions? What is it? What what do
you think will happen? Because we do
have a massive economic problem or
crisis coming ahead of us. We have as I
mentioned before the a legitimacy crisis
I think of the political leadership and
you see this not only in the polls which
would suggest they're not popular but
not being popular and not being seen as
being legitimate. That's two different
things. So there is a real crisis and
yeah that's my whole the point of what I
want to talk about as well was when you
have an economic problem it does create
a social societal as well as a pol
political crisis. So, um, it's not going
to be just as it was in the past, but,
uh, if history doesn't, uh, repeat
itself, you know, it rhymes. So, what
what what will this revolution look like
in your view?
>> Well, I it is a speculative question.
I'm not sure that my guesses about it
are are any any wiser or better than
that of anyone else. But I'm struck here
in the United States that there will be
a struggle between three ideas
of what a revolution which almost
everyone already half agreed. I mean you
you get you get into a taxi here in New
York City and and the conversation is a
variation of the following. Everything
seems to be falling apart. Yeah,
everything is falling apart. We need
really big ch Yeah, we need everybody,
you know, it it it's in the air. No one
spells it out exactly, but it's in the
air. So, given that, I think there are
three scenarios.
Number one,
a a a straight out fascism, an attempt
to reorganize this society top down. Um,
there are voices here in the United
States that are already uh making a big
deal out of why we ought to be a quote
unquote monarchy or a republic but not a
democracy. In other words, let's stop
all this talk about we're all equal.
We're not. Some of us are appropriately
in power and authority and others of not
us should shut up and be grateful that
it's all being taken care of. So there's
that. Uh Trump is halfway there and
there are a lot of people once he dies
or passes from the scene who will push
in that uh direction.
The second will be a Roosevelt Franklin
Rooseveltian
explosion and that's even more likely if
Trump stays in long enough to provoke
another crash.
Uh you will then see a a good chance for
the Democratic party to find itself
again. It is now terribly dysfunctional.
But it it could rise to that moment. We
are the alternative. We you know give us
the authority and then you might see
quite a swing of the pendulum simply
because
to undo Trump you have to go a bit.
And then there's the third one. And the
third one is a perspective that may
may become important. It is not yet. And
this is a perspective that the crisis is
real, but that the crisis is more than a
matter of steering the whole apparatus.
It's a view that you really have to go
through a fundamental
change of the way the system works. And
by that I mean a fundamental
redistribution of wealth.
Uh
and by that I mean something more than
was ever done before. Roosevelt did a
good bit of that. But we're talking
about a deeper crisis and one that
involves the whole population in a way
that Roosevelt didn't. And
with this would go a
re, how shall I put it? A rediscovery
of elements of historical socialism that
have been out of the picture for a long
time. And the way I would describe this
is if you pick up Marx's capal and you
read it volume one or you teach it which
I do
then you'll know that the whole focus
for Marx and volume one is the only of
the three volumes that he wrote that for
Marx's focus was on the organization
of production. this whole division of
the people who come together so that
some of them are employees
and are told what to do and others are
employers.
As I earlier said, I define capitalism
as that unique way of organizing
production.
That will be called into question. And
the argument will be made that to make
an equal distribution of wealth real
and to make it permanent
and all that goes with that in the kind
of society we want.
We have to democratize
the enterprise, democratize production.
go from what you might think of as your
conventional capitalist corporation to
something like a worker cooperative.
And we have those all around the world,
models of them, variations on them.
We're not starting from something
altogether new,
but it would be a radical thing to
organize an entire economy like that.
But that would be the argument of what
would then be the extreme left.
But the crisis in this country is such
that that perspective is now growing and
gaining traction here. And I think
that's a symptom
of how far people's alienation
from what is going on has has developed
as is the election of Mamani and all the
other things we've talked about.
>> Well, thank you for taking the time and
uh yeah, unpacking this the idea of a
pre-revolutionary moment. It is uh it's
uh I think only a few months ago people
would have challenged the the idea that
there was something profoundly
uh problematic happening both in
[snorts] society in the political system
as a consequence of the economic decline
but I think it's becoming very difficult
to ignore at this point in time. So
thank you again.
>> My pleasure. And Glenn, I wanted to say
to you that the other day a couple of my
students because I still teach at the
university here in New York came to me
and began their questioning of me by
quoting a program of yours. So that yes,
we thought Glenn Dies. I just wanted you
to know that your word is spreading and
that it's very important. uh people are
thinking and about what you what you
carry on your program and you know
that's the best compliment I can think
of to the value of the work that you do.
>> Well, please tell your students. I
they're deeply grateful that they watch.
So, thank you.
>> All right. I'm going to tell them just
because they'll be pleased that I
mentioned it. So, I'll give them your
response as well.
Byebye.
