Welcome back to the program. We are
joined here today by Professor Richard
Wolf to discuss uh some of the new
developments. Uh, of course, everyone's
uh talking about the new uh national
security strategy of the United States
and uh yeah, I look forward to get your
perspective. So, as always, thank you
for coming back on the program.
>> Well, Glenn, I'm very glad to be here
and thank you for inviting me.
So I consider myself to be a bit of an
economic nationalist in terms of
believing that technological and
economic sovereignty is a requirement
for political sovereignty and freedom.
So I therefore like the people like
Alexander Hamilton, Fidicist, Sergey H
sorry um Serge and um I found it
interesting that the new US national
security strategy which everyone's
focusing on obviously looking more at
the military component but there was an
interesting paragraph there a long one
devoted to Hamilton and these uh
economic plans uh perhaps um the
administration uh reinterpreted it uh a
little bit freely in ways that I
wouldn't necessarily agree with, but
nonetheless. Uh what what do you make of
this though, the new national security
strategy in terms of uh yeah,
international trade and politics?
Well, I think it is, and of course the
people who wrote it would not agree with
what I'm about to say, but I think it
represents as close to an admission on
their part as they could possibly get to
that the American Empire is over, that
the global reach of that empire is
forever gone, or at least gone for the
time being.
and that they articulate and want to
articulate
a positively inflected strategy for
where to go from here. Because the old
idea which is a a century old of this
country that it is the new wave of the
future that it embodies all the great
advances political, economic, cultural,
military,
uh the exceptional US, all of that.
12 ways of saying
that there is something permanent about
a condition that was absolutely not
permanent. And what do I mean? All of
this stuff was tentative until the end
of 1945.
It was articulated earlier,
but it wasn't believed even by the
people who who articulate. They knew
they were boosters. They knew they were
cheerleaders and they wanted to
celebrate the growth of the United
States. No question. But to become the
global empire,
to replace the British, no. They didn't
think that was available to them. Not at
all. Not not deep down when they spoke
honestly.
The end of World War II changed that.
That war dis was the spectacle of the
destruction of every other conceivable
competitor of the United States.
Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
China, Russia, all of them destroyed
each other. The one place they didn't
destroy was the United States.
you know, other than Pearl Harbor at the
beginning, and that was in Hawaii, no
bombs fell here. No factories were
destroyed, no bridges blown up, nothing.
And in terms of the economy, we were in
the worst depression of capitalism from
1929 to 1941.
What got us out was the war. The war
took millions of unemployed. Half of
them took uniforms and became the army
and the other half got jobs making the
uniforms for the army.
So that when the war is over, Americans
have accumulated income because they had
jobs.
They couldn't spend it because
production was for war. So you ended up
with an overload of demand.
a shortage of supply
and a hungry pol
that had gone through a decade of
depression and then half a decade of war
and so hadn't replaced the the windows
of their house or purchased a new car or
anything else and they would now do it.
And so you had a growth spurt
and a comp that would have been enough.
But the combination of a growth spurt in
the US 50s and 60s
and the decimation of Europe, it led to
extraordinary actions like the Marshall
Plan.
give us even more jobs by lending Europe
the money with which to buy the American
goods they needed to rebuild their
economies because they had suffered from
the from the depression also plus the
war which had been directly destructive
of them and of their people.
I might mention it's important to
understand that period of American
history for another reason that shines a
light on the present.
The United States became stronger
fighting a big war that cost enormous
resources and deflected tens of millions
of people from their regular jobs to the
war.
But out of it came a much stronger
economy.
That's what's gone on in Russia since
the beginning of 2022.
It shouldn't come as a surprise if you
understand the certain conditions. War
can be a very positive opportunity for
an economy. Can be the opposite. But
that not it's not about the war. It's
about the conditions within which and
around which a war happens. Anyway, it
should have been clear to everybody that
post World War II, the United States was
in a very exceptional position.
All the other potential competitors,
Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Japan,
China, Russia would now be focused on
catching up to the United States,
recovering from the war, reacquiring
their global position, the Europeans on
top of great colonies,
the Chinese and the Russians.
more of the the bad boys who would have
to prove without help of Marshall Plan,
without help of the West, they could do
it, too.
Well, the bottom line we now know
the people who got Marshall Plan help
now regret it. And the people who didn't
did much better. Those who' relied on
themselves, led by the Chinese, did much
better. Getting help from the United
States, was a short-term benefit at an
enormous long-term price.
But because the empire has now
started to dissolve because the rest of
the world has its own idea about how to
develop and where to develop. They don't
want to keep subsidizing the United
States by the global use of the dollar.
They don't want to subsidize the United
States by the whole system of oil being
priced in dollars creating the pool of
money that get gets lent to the United
States to fund its foreign policy
without taxing its own people, which is
what we have been doing in this country
for many years.
All of that is over. It's over in little
bits. It's no catastrophic event. But
now the little bits have added up
and they have shown the military that
even when they are fighting the poorest
countries in the world,
Afghanistan,
Iraq,
you know, Vietnam,
I mean these are the poorest of the
poor, the overwhelmingly powerful United
States cannot defeat them.
This is a lesson the military is acutely
aware of. The rest of the country slowly
becoming aware of that document issued
on the 4th of December.
It pretty much says it.
We can't dominate the world. We are
going to try to be preeminent in this
hemisphere, you know, the western
hemisphere.
you know, a wonderful statement that the
accommodation with the British Empire in
1830 that created the so-called Monroe
Doctrine is now being brought back.
this time, not as the United States
asserts its expansion,
but that the United States is trying to
hold on to at least the piece of the
world it once aspired
to control. Th this is going to have
ramifications
on the politics, on the ideology, on
everything in this country. It'll cause
unspeakable trouble in Latin America,
which we can talk about. But it it is,
if I could say so, and of course, Glenn,
please disagree with me, but the part of
the world that is literally thrown under
the bus is Europe. for the United
States. Europe is now
interesting
only as a source of tribute.
Or if you're not going to give us the
tribute, then we are just as soon have
you disappear,
stay there, become a part of the world
known for tourism
or something else like that, you know,
where people can go and see ancient
cultures that used to be very important
in the world but are now receding into
France or Norway or whatever the the the
place is. But we'll we'll get let you do
more than that. But then you got to pay
tribute. You got to commit like
Vanderlayan to buy $700 billion worth of
nic liqufied natural gas at three times
the price of what you got Russian oil
and gas for from before, thereby
crippling your industry.
and like she did commit to investing 7
to800
billion dollar over the next 10 years of
money raised in and by Europe will be
invested here.
How you're going to sell that to the
voters of Europe? How in the world you
become tributaries?
You're like parts of of the surrounding
of the Roman Empire or the surroundings
of the Ottoman Empire paying tribute.
And if you don't pay enough tribute, we
will punish you with a tariff or
something else. This is
for the what the Europeans are going to
do.
Let me say it as starkly as I can. What
that document does is tell the
Europeans, even if they can't see it yet
and if they can't hear it yet,
it tells them we the Americans
now understand the world economy
and its change.
And we are now going to try to build an
alliance with Russia and China.
And you, the Europeans,
are pretty soon going to probably make
the same decision. And we will compete
for the Russians and the Chinese.
And we're in better shape to do that
than you are.
And so it's not looking good for you at
all.
>> I like what you said about the the yeah
the Marshall Plan being a short-term or
medium-term benefit because the
advantage of countries like Russia or
China is uh because the US always saw
them as adversaries. You can't make
yourself too dependent on the United
States which meant that they pursue
their own technological sovereignty,
financial sovereignty. They yeah so they
built up their own capacity to to
strengthen their political sovereignty
in case the US would come after them.
But for the Europeans they always
thought that US would be their best
friends forever. they bought into this
whole idea that you know allies are
based on values instead of strategic
interests and I don't think they
realized that the the political west it
create the way it has existed it has a
quite a unique condition I mean in the
bipolar world it made sense you had had
to contain the Soviet Union you even saw
that economic competition between the
western powers during the cold war was
reduced because of the higher goals of
the of of of of the cold war that is
balancing the Soviets in the uniolar it
also made sense the US empire needed
certain nodes be it Germany Japan um and
yeah the interests were harmonized but
in the multipolar world I this yeah
there's no foundation anymore for this
partnership and I think you're correct
that the and and that now the only way
they can keep the Americans in Europe is
by paying tribute to win America's
affection but the more tribute they
And by definition almost going against
your own national interest, the weaker
they get, the less relevant. And
you see you see this irrelevance and
almost disdain from the United States.
Uh but of course the national security
strategy is uh yeah well we don't have
to go through all of it, but it's it's
it's very hostile towards Europe. Uh
even suggesting some regime change might
be good or at least cultivate
opposition. uh but uh there's another uh
uh argument or proposal which has come
out that is that the G7 also isn't
really that relevant anymore. I mean
these are not the the leading economies
anymore and the Trump administration has
suggested according to reports that it's
better to replace it with a core five or
C5 which would be the US, China, India,
uh Japan and Russia and not a single
European country well besides from
Russia are now included on that list.
This is uh this is quite extraordinary.
uh I'm a political realist so I tend to
think that institutions and such
arrangements uh have to reflect the
actual international distribution of
power to be stable. Um but uh but
nonetheless it it's it spells out a very
negative future for Europe though. So
what what do you see being the economic
future of Europe? Because I I always
wonder if I'm too hawkish or too
pessimistic here.
Well,
as usual, for me anyway, in the end, the
decisive forces are internal, not
external. I think what happens in Europe
now,
it's not that the external shocks, if
you like, are are not important. They
are. That's why you know I begin by
saying that paper from last week is a
very profound
u conceptual moment in our culture and
will impact the Europeans. But I think
it depends on how European politics
internally goes. are they how committed
are the mass of the European people to
the leaderships they have now the
political parties they have now uh
capitalism as the system they have now
in a world that is changing so fast and
in ways which I think most Europeans are
sooner or later going to realize are
very dangerous particularly for them
It'll enhance the awareness we need to
make some basic changes.
Now,
they're not going to catch up to the to
the existing
uh powers. I mean, the Germans are the
making the most aggressive move to
militarize themselves. the the big loan
that Meritz is taking out, the the
fiscal deficit funding of a military big
buildup.
First of all, I wonder that the rest of
Europe isn't worried about
what happens when Germany has an immense
army and nobody else does.
But I would also argue that given the
amount of spending that Russia and China
are committed to do to upgrade their
military, given the United States's
funding of upgrading,
the Europeans, well, they they can't
catch up. The only way they could work
is if their military technology jumped
over
that of Russia, China, and the United
States. That's possible, but it's not
likely.
It's not even likely that the Germans
can do without buying a lot of the
intermediate and final military goods
that are part of their buildup. They
don't have the industrial structure to
do that all themselves. That's what
they've lost. That's what all of Europe
has lost. And that isn't overcome
overnight, which means a lot of that
spending is actually going to leak out
to other parts of the world that make
that stuff that they're going to need.
So I see limping along doing what they
say they're going to do
is very very unlikely to take them very
far. And I'm afraid I don't see the move
towards unity at all. I mean the way in
which France, England and Germany
are pushing to use the 200 billion of
Russian assets against the wishes of
Hungary, Belgium and a variety of other
that doesn't look like a unified Europe.
That looks like a Europe, you know,
breaking apart. And if they go through
with the plan to make all of Europe
liable,
if that money never gets paid back,
which I doubt it will,
then you're going to impose
debt service on people opposed to the
loan.
Maybe Europe can hold together across
that kind of difference, but I don't
think so, especially not with the other
um pressures that are on them. So,
finally, could you have a breakout if
there were a drastic realignment?
Yes.
And you have in Europe the socialist
basis
to imagine that. I'm not saying you
could do it. That is a long shot for
sure given the way the politics there
now looks. But it might give you a
completely different situation if
production were genuinely collectivized.
If you if you made the factories owned
and operated by the workers themselves,
you could still have a military program
and all of that, but it would be a you
it would be a challenge to the world,
very different from anything that anyone
has so far foreseen. Because let me be a
little bit dramatic with you. It would
be as if Europe were saying,
"We never took socialism very seriously.
What we did, we allowed socialist
parties to function. We allowed them to
win votes. We allowed them to form
governments. And we allowed them to
regulate a private capitalist economy.
Little more, little less from one
country to another. But what we never
did was make the revolution at the micro
level. We never questioned that the
capitalist enterprise would be run as a
topdown autocracy, which is what it is
in Britain and the United States. And it
isn't so different anywhere else in
Europe either. Suppose you change that.
Suppose you said we're socialists and we
notice that in volume one of Capital
Markx does not say one word about
government versus private. It's not a
topic he's interested in. He never wrote
about it. It wasn't a whether the
employer is a private person or the
employer is a government agency. What
matters said Markx is that it's an
employer in a relationship of employer
employee with the vast majority. Suppose
you challenge that
then Europe could say to China, I'm
being dramatic with you.
We're the real socialism.
You're the one who's hesitant to take
that step.
You're still the state is the dominant
the party in the state as the dominant
forces. You have a 50% state 50%
private. But both the private and the
state are run in the way Marx whom you
credit as your inspiration
railed against.
Those relations of production were what
he opposed.
Now, he didn't go off and speculate what
the alternative would look like. He
didn't believe in doing that, which I
understand. His job was criticism. But
the implication of the criticism
is what the communards did in the Paris
Commune in 1870. It's what the Boleviks
did in 1917 and on and on. They then
created a state capitalism. Understood?
may well have been the only thing to do
at that time. I'm not being, you know, a
Monday morning quarterback looking back
on, look, I'm I'm not interested in
that.
You can't get that stage that Markx had
in his mind until the conditions for it
are ripe.
Here comes the interesting question.
is the ironic
danger to Europe
possibly an catalyst to provoke
questions about change that would allow
Europe to leap over what has been done
in China. You're not going to do that
with military technology and you're not
going to do it with fast trains or
electric cars. it's too late. But in the
reorganization of enterprise
to fulfill the old socialist idea,
Europe could do that. And the question
is, will they ever have the political
sense of themselves
to make that effort? If they don't,
then I think they're looking at an ever
longer period. You see, if I thought it
was just Trump,
then I would do what I suspect many
Europeans are telling themselves. He
won't be here in three years. His term
will be over and then we'll get back to,
you know, Joe Biden or things like that.
I think that's a mistake.
I think you're seeing the ruling class
of this country perfectly happy with the
efforts Mr. Trump is making. They
wouldn't say it the same way. He's very
rough and blunt and
ignorant and crude, but they're not
stopping him. They're not even stopping
him from the boats in the Caribbean,
which is straight out murder. They're
not. And
I don't hear any significant
support for Europe. The only area where
I hear sympathy for Europe here in the
country is on the particular notion
of Ukraine. Yes. On eur there's a
significant support inside the United
States for the European insistence on
keeping that war going. But it is
getting smaller every day and at a
certain point it will leave the
political arena because he doesn't have
enough people pushing for it.
Yeah. No. Uh I think this was a mistake
in the first Trump administration as
well. The assumption that uh everything
will go back to the way it was before.
But I I don't I think they always
assumed that Trump is the main problem
as opposed to symptom of a wider problem
because then there was also the
assumption that well how can Trump walk
away from the JCPOA with Iran or why
would it go into an economic war with
China but once Biden took over he
followed the same policies. So uh I I
don't I I I do think that NATO is more
or less done. But this is why I'm also a
bit frustrated by Europe's inability to
adjust because
um you know the the decision to redivide
Europe again after the cold war by
expanding NATO and um uh this was
essentially the price we had to pay to
keep the the leading US position in
Europe. But now that NATO is declining
uh and US wants to decouple from Europe,
that is Europe has to diversify. It just
seems like that now it's an opportunity
to rectify some of the mistakes we've
done. That is to start this cold war
with the Russians. But this is an
impossible argument to sell in Europe
these days, though. They just they don't
care now. Even if America leaves Europe,
they still want to fight the Russians.
It's unclear what the objective is and
why. They keep assuming that. Uh I
always always hear the argument that
well they're attacking us. They're doing
hybrid warfare. They're going to come
for us. But no one asks why. Why what
exactly would their objective be? I mean
the the they're ramping up everything.
You know, they're also recognizing the
multiple world. They're pivoting to the
east. Um, but I did want to ask though
about you mentioned before the Venezuela
because that's one component of the
economic or the national security
strategy which evokes some concerns
because uh it um well the Monroe
doctrine was supposed to prevent other
great powers from setting up in well
especially military or colonies in the
Americas in the Western Hemisphere. But
this is something very different. This
is the US dominating uh very much um all
of the countries. Uh how do you how do
you read into this? And does that
explain some of the policies now? I mean
the threat of invading Venezuela, the
argument that Colombia might be next,
attempting to strangle Cuba. I see now
that Trump made a comment that he
doesn't rule out strikes in Mexico
either if he can stop drugs. I mean, is
this the Monroe Doctrine uh on
militarism and steroids or how how do
you interpret this?
>> No, I think it has many
many roots. It certainly is rooted in
the Monroe doctrine. They say that
that's not clearly part of their
thinking. I think it's rooted in the
kind of bitterness
that comes when you are forced to
recognize that you cannot do the global
project you had intended. All right. So
now you you hunker down. We say in
American English, you you narrow you
shrink the area. You're going to
dominate, but you're going to show the
world what domination means. You did it
verbally. I'm going to take Panama back
or I'm going to take Greenland from
Denmark or
But those things are complicated.
There's opposition that you didn't
foresee.
So, you've got to find something a
little bit more palatable, particularly
to your own people. And the drug story,
wonderful. You know, the drug story
is as phony as a $3 bill, which doesn't
exist. Uh,
but it's in that way, it's as phony as
combating anti-semitism
on campuses.
There was no very little anti-semitism
on our campuses less than five years
ago, even less than 10 years ago. If if
it if there was a problem, it wasn't
dealt with by any policy. Now there
barely is a problem and you make an
enormous event. Well, it's transparent.
you could do the job you needed to do to
destroy the pro Palestinian anti-Israeli
movement in the United States which is
still strong but was even stronger
particularly on campuses by coming up
with an alternative campus crusade
uh that not only mobilized students in a
completely different issue but mobilized
them against the young people raising
the Palestinian flag and stuff like
that. So, it was very convenient.
Narco trafficking or narco boats, it's
the same thing. It's a it's a complete
fakery. The country suffers from an
epidemic of u artificial heroin
and it kills 70 to 80,000 people per
year in this country. uh many young
people, many of the people, the children
of the adults who vote for for Trump
because they have no future. They have
no job. There is nothing coming back.
The American dream is completely
unaffordable.
Uh now we have this unaffordability
problem in America. The president is
running around talking about
unaffordability.
Uh the the the bottom line in this
country
is that we are shrinking.
We are slipping. The war in Ukraine is
being lost. And yes, you can blame
the Europeans. And yes, you can blame
Zilinski. And we now have front page
stories every day about corruption
around Mr. Zilinski. Sure. Sure. Sure.
But it's a problem and that problem is
we can't p we can't succeed
militarily.
We need to win some.
And that's why it's important to have a
war with Venezuela or Cuba. And it can
be bloody. wouldn't be even so bad
because it'll allow lots of funeral
marches and the president can march
alongside behind the coffin of the
soldiers who to help their fellow young
people avoid drugs died in a jungle in
in Venezuela. All of this is being
ramped up. So long answer, yeah, I think
this is the behavior of a country denied
its global empire role and now
determined to compensate for that by
aggressively
reestablishing
its dominance in Latin America. And I
think you're seeing an initial
fear reaction.
And the fear is not what you might
think. The fear is of each Latin
American country vis of any others.
which one will become the friend of the
United States and thereby get help to
destroy and overthrow the ones who are
not the friends of the United and that's
the fear
alongside that fear so far unspoken
and I believe is the stronger feeling
this cannot happen.
We s we Latin America we suffered the
colonial position in the 19th. We it
started with the with the Spanish and
the Portuguese back in the 15th 16th uh
century. Then we had European
colonialism a little bit different
settler colonialisms of various kinds uh
in the 18th and particularly the 19th
and 20th century. We now live in the era
of anti- or postc colonialism. That is
very very powerful and I don't think the
United States in the long run will
succeed by setting itself up as the
negation. I think what they're going to
do though is they're going to infuse
that part of the world with many Gazas
because that's the model. Israel and
Palestine is the settler colonialism
that comes two or three centuries too
late. The British could do it in
Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the
United States, South Africa, and so on.
But they could do it then. They can't do
it. Israel is trying to do it now.
Cannot do it. You can't. That's why
those people will never go away. They
don't feel alone. They're bombed every
day. They stay there. They have a sense
when they listen to them.
We will eventually get this.
We may not live and our children will
have one arm and all the rest of it, but
we are the future, not Israel. And
Israel tries to tell its people, "We are
the future." And most Israelis don't
believe it.
I talked to an Israeli diplomat not very
long ago, and all he could tell me was,
"If we go down, we take the whole world
with us." A frightening concept. but one
that he said was
clear and present in his mind as a
member of the Israeli you know
bureaucracy.
Yeah, that's a crazy way of looking at
the world. Uh let let me just say one
last question about the the Monroe
doctrine here though because the whole
assumption [clears throat] would be if
the US can negotiate with the other
great powers to stay out the US will
seek to dominate but always a problem
with this approach is that it ignores or
even rejects the agency of the the
regional countries. I mean the Brazil is
not a tiny country. the idea that they
can kind of be bullied out of bricks and
fall in line.
But but it doesn't even have to be any
direct attacks on Brazil, but just the
idea of bombing Venezuela, threatening
Colombia. I mean, the it seems as if
this could fuel a lot of resentment in
in the the region towards the United
States, which then could be taken
advantage of by a rival great power. So
how do you I don't know what what do you
see in the future of the m of Latin
America though
>> I see exactly that I see exactly what
you said I think we already seeing it I
don't know exactly what the Russians and
Chinese have given to Maduro in
Venezuela but I understand there are
ships Chinese ones for sure but even
Russian ones around the water there also
there have been missile delivery ies. I
mean, I would not be at all surprised if
the Americans land and discover a level
of arms in the hands of the Venezuelan
army that they were not prepared for
either because they don't know or they
couldn't believe it or uh they thought
it was fake or whatever excuses they
give. No, I'm you're absolutely right.
those countries will now
seeing what's on the agenda given the
global
you know global south antic-colonial
postc colonial all of that they're going
to look for
help from Russia and China and the
bricks and they're going to get it
you can see it already look at the
statistic over the last year Chinese
exports to the United states dropped
29%.
But their total exports are bigger than
they were last year. You know what that
means? It means, and it wasn't Europe
that explains it, it means China's
exports to the bricks basically to the
rest of the world grew more than their
exports to the United States shrunk.
There it is. There's the option. One of
the people have to remember one of the
things the United States has always done
is use sanctions
and basically terrified the country that
by sanctioning their banks or their
exports or their imports. Yeah, they
have to get now. They don't. They don't.
And so they're going to feel rightly or
wrongly much more free [snorts] to go
and make another deal that escapes the
sanctions. That means the United States
will have to use military everywhere.
It can't do that.
It doesn't have the army for it. It
can't do that. So now what is it? It's
going to have to prioritize. It's going
to have to do triage. Which where are
you going to fight? You going to fight
somewhere in periphery of Europe in in
the Middle East? Are you going to have
to ratchet up help for Israel? Are you
going to have a struggle in Taiwan and
fight in Venezuela? This is it's
becoming too much. And by the way,
that's the typical problem of an empire
that dies. It's overreach. It can't do
what has to be done to keep the empire
going. So, it tries, it becomes weaker.
The weakness is taken advantage of by a
competitor or by a a rebellious colony
and then they need to fight again. And
that weaken and we're in that situation.
>> Yeah. This is the always the problem
with uh excessive sanctions over a
prolonged period of time. That is uh the
rest of the world stops using your
technologies, your industries. Uh they
divorce your supply chains, find new uh
transportation corridors, u develop new
development banks, new use their own
currencies, uh their own payment
systems, insuranceances, uh commodity
exchanges. I mean everything can be um
can be exchanged if economic dependence
is weaponized. This is the problem of I
guess declining hedgeimmons and I think
the Europeans also of course have made
some uh big mistakes. Uh again we could
have talked for a long time about this
stealing the Russian assets but the idea
that it will actually put in place a
rule in which there has to be uniformity
to release the money. There's no chance
in the future, you know, Estonia is
going to allow hundreds of billions
being returned to Russia. I mean, this
is this is just and no, it it's
completely wild that they're actually
going down this path. Who in their right
mind would ever allow any of their
sovereign funds going through the
Euroair again in the future? But, uh,
no, I think u
Yeah.
>> No, and I I think it's not a it's not a
long step. Look, I live here in New York
City. One of the major streets in New
York City is called Fifth Avenue. It's a
very popular shop, very expensive, but a
shopping area uh for people. Well, if
you It's famous. If you walk down Fifth
Avenue in the evening, most of the
windows of the tall buildings on either
side of the street are dark. So here it
is nighttime, you know, it's dark, but
there's nobody in these apartments. A
few are lit up, but most of them are
not. And so the the realtor agent, the
real estate agent will will explain to
you this is all foreign money. They buy
an apartment here because it's a safe
way to park your money if you're a rich
somebody from Malaysia or from, you
know, Togo or from it does, you know,
Panama, it doesn't matter. You buy an
apartment and you watch it value go up
and it's a wonderful place. Your
government can't touch it. Nobody who
bothers you about your assets can touch
it. your children can go for a shopping
trip to New York City once or twice a
year and stay in the apartment because
it's cleaned every month by you know all
okay those are all being sold now those
wealthy people have figured out that if
you can weaponize
sovereign funds
who's going to control when it becomes
no longer legal for a foreigner to own
an apartment in New York It take a very
short time for the government of New
York to to do such a thing.
You can't be exposed here anymore. You
can't be exposed to Europe for sure, but
you can't be exposed here anymore the
way you were. You may not get rid of
everything here, but you're going to
reduce your your outlays in the United
States and get another apartment in
Paris or in London or in Rome or in or
in or New Delhi or Sao Paulo because
you have there is no hegeimon anymore.
It's over. It's now only a question of
the time it takes for each asset class
to make its escape and that and we're at
that. We're already at that point.
>> Well, thank you for taking the time and
um yeah, I look forward to speaking with
you again in terms of this. Uh the
economic changes now are just
extraordinary though. The you're seeing
now in weeks what happened in years. So
>> that's right. And and I was about to say
that to you. Things are happening very
fast here. So, my guess is we'll be
talking again very soon.
>> I look forward to it.
>> All right. Bye-bye.
