Hi everyone and welcome. Uh today we are
joined by the economist uh the professor
Richard Wolff. It's yeah fantastic to
have you back.
My pleasure. Glad to be here. I uh
wanted to ask you first about the scope
and the state of the trade war between
the United States and China because uh I
guess the scope is quite wide. We're not
just talking about trade. We're not just
talking about tariffs, technologies, uh
financial,
uh it it encompasses uh yeah quite a
wide range. Uh how how can you explain
the the trade
war? Well, I think I have to respond to
to the very good question by by
splitting my level of response. Uh so
I'm going to start by saying what I
think Mr. Trump's regime's motivations
are, what their hopes are uh to get out
of this. This is very much an American
policy. No one should be under any
illusion. The Europeans don't want this,
did not push for it. The Chinese don't
want this, did not push for it. This is
an American initiative
uh and should be understood in that
light. So, first let me say what I think
the regime's uh goals are in doing all
of this and then let me talk about what
I believe are the more important and
underlying causes for the whole
spectacle, the whole theater.
It is fashionable here in the United
States for the uh the Democratic Party,
the party that lost uh the presidential
election and the party that lost control
of both houses of the US Parliament, the
Congress of the United States, giving
Mr. Trump pretty much
um an enormous amount of power that he
does not have to bargain with uh uh a
powerful
opposition. It it's not that he has
total power, he doesn't, but he has more
than most presidents usually do.
uh and he has decided to make use of
that by being more
ambitious, more uh willing to go to
extremes than have either Republican or
Democratic presidents quite for quite
some time. You might even say for most
of the last 75
years. And those 75 years, basically the
period since the end of the Second World
War, have been a time not only of
moderate behavior by American presidents
and congresses and by the two parties,
but it's also, and not coincidentally,
been a time of the American Empire, the
heyday, the peak, if you like, of a
process that began already at the end of
the 19th century in which the United
States displaced the British Empire from
that global role and that made it
possible for the United States
to make the dollar the world's currency
to become the dominant economic,
political,
ideological and military
power. The problem is that the very
success of that
position and this has happened many
times in
history proved also to be its
undoing. So for example, having the
dollar the world currency gave the
United States an enormous subsidy
because the central banks around the
world in Norway, in Europe, in Asia, uh
added to their reserves behind their own
currencies, not just gold, but the US
dollar, which was quote unquote as good
as gold. And that meant that the United
States could bring in French wine and
Norwegian sardines and oil and all the
rest of it and in
exchange give you basically worthless
pieces of green paper. And since you
didn't want to hold worthless pieces of
green paper, you use them to lend money
to the United States government which in
turn used that money to pay for the
empire. So in a world in a way if you
understand the
economics the United States in that
manner got the rest of the world to
finance the empire that dominated the
rest of the world. It did it in a way
somewhat different from how the British
did it, but pretty much the same thing.
When the British, you know, ripped off
India, used Indians in their army, used
Indians in every conceivable way, you
have a very similar uh situation, a bit
more concentrated in the areas of the
British Empire. The US dollar could do
it everywhere. uh didn't have to have it
literally part of the empire but
conducted the same
um how shall I put it fundamentally
exploitative
arrangement. Well, you know, this made
it so easy to borrow that our political
economy became an economy in which the
Republicans who limited taxes on
corporations and the rich to build up
their support in the
society and the Democrats who tended
more to spend money on the mass of
people to build up their support in the
population put the political leaders in
an impossible
situation. You could not tax the
Republicans couldn't tax the rich
because that was their donor
base. Politics in America is very much a
matter of money. So the Republicans get
their money from the people whom they
protect against taxes. So you shift the
burden of taxes onto the mass of the
working class until they have no more
money and are angry and then the
Democratic Party doesn't dare tax the
mass of people either. So how are you
going to spend money on what people need
a global empire a defense establishment
bigger than anything in the world and
roads and highways and schools and
hospital? The answer is you borrow and
you borrow because you can because the
whole world is busy parking the dollars
that they need in the form of Treasury
securities. So we go into debt. Our debt
is now $35 trillion and our GDP is about
26 or 27 trillion. You see the problem?
And a week ago, Monday, the
Japanese, one of the most docile allies
the United States has had since the
Second World War, for the first time
said, &amp;quot;It is too risky. You cannot ask
us to lend you more money.&amp;quot; I should
mention the United States is the biggest
debtor country in the world and the
number one creditor of the United States
is Japan and the number two is the
people's republic of China and therein
lies more than I can explain in in many
hours. Just remember what I just said.
You will understand where we are. So,
what is Mr. Trump
doing? He's desperately
trying to deal with the
impossible situation of the American
government's
finances in the conditions we now face.
It's trying to bring down the
spending more aggressively than anyone
has done. and he's trying to bring up
the income of the government more
aggressively when it comes to cutting
spending. That is, as I'm sure you and
your audience know, the wholesale
cancelling of half of what the federal
government
does in this has nothing to do with
efficiency, which it isn't. is an
exercise in whatever the opposite of
efficiency is. That's what we're
watching. And everybody with half a
brain knows it. This is not about
efficiency. This is
about taking care of business by
slashing whatever the government does
because whatever damage that does is
less than the existential risk of being
unable to borrow which is the way this
empire has been held together. And
number
two, to try to
make an income for the government out of
imposing
tariffs on the whole world, trying to
tell the American people that this is a
burden on everybody else, not them. as
if the whole world faced with tariffs
will now bring their prices down to
offset the impact of the American tariff
and thereby hold on to their market in
the United States. Because if the tariff
adds to the cost for Americans, if you
in Norway reduce the price of your oil
or your sardines or anything else, then
the price won't go up so much and you'll
be able to hold on to your market. But
the government will get the revenue of
the tariff to bring that in. And by
doing it to everybody, the whole world,
you can begin to see the empire trying
to hold
on. But you must understand it is
desperation that drives this, not some
cool working out of a new policy. This
is the old policy, cutting spending,
which Republicans
do. If there's anything new, it's that
the Republican party, having spent the
last century being the
anti-ax
conservatives, have now imposed the
biggest tax imaginable on the American
people. This will come back to haunt
them because it's an opposition to every
ideological, you know, these are
libertarians. They believe that the
government should be minimally involved.
They are bringing the government in
massively. We have turned away from
globalization and
neoliberalism to
selffocused economic nationalism and
there is no concern for the rest of the
world and particularly not for the
allies Canada and Mexico here and the
Europeans and the Australians and so on
uh around the world. This is a
plan. It's not very well thought
through. It is already producing
backlash that makes it very unclear
whether this is going to work at
all. But it is a
plan. Okay. So that's the first
level. The second level is
this. Mr. Trump is desperate. But that's
not because Mr. Trump has had something
wrong with him. I understand people
don't like his style. He is very all
over the place. He clearly doesn't
understand many of these things. When he
first began talking about tariffs, he he
really said that they would be paid for
by the countries that he targeted. He
didn't understand that Americans pay a
tariff to the American government. that
had to be explained to him over and over
again. And even now he sometimes seems
not to quite get
that. His language is the tariff is
going to be paid by the Chinese. No, it
isn't. It's a little bit like in his
first presidency, he told the Americans
that he was going to build a wall to
block off the
Mexicans and that the Mexicans would pay
for the
wall. The Mexicans immediately said that
will never happen. That will never
happen. And it never happened. Right?
And so now that he can't say it, so he
doesn't say it anymore. Well, the rest
of the world isn't going to pay these
tariffs either. That's not what it's not
what's going to happen. Uh and so for
me, what I see going on
is a
desperation that cannot be admitted by
the United States. We just had an
election between uh Biden and Trump and
then between Trump and Kla Harris in
which none none of those three
presidential candidates said one word
about what this underlying problem is.
And here it is. The underlying problem
is that the American empire is
over. The Europeans cannot figure that
out. I mean, I
watch, you know, I watch Macron or
Starmer or Fried M in Germany or uh the
woman Maloney in Italy. I get a lot of
language, but they don't seem to be any
more able than the
Americans to say what I just said. The
the empire is doing now, what every
empire in the world has done. After a
period, maybe lasting a century or maybe
two or maybe even sometimes three, then
there comes the peak and then the
decline. We don't have a Greek empire
anymore. We once did or a Roman Empire
or a Persian Empire or an Ottoman Empire
or even an earlier Chinese empire.
They're all gone.
So the American Empire, we all
understood or should have would
eventually turn down. Wasn't a question
of whether. It was just a question of
when. And exactly how. Well, when is
now. And how? Well, that's what we're
watching. And what just the how now is
desperate
actions of extremity, extreme cutting
back of spending and extreme imposing of
taxes. And we shouldn't be surprised
because it's all covered over with a
denial of the underlying problem making
people
desperate mostly
because what they're trying to do
doesn't
work. And you know I I don't know maybe
is it possible that Mr. Trump's policies
will somehow work? It's not a zero
probability.
It could be. I can't predict the future
any better than anyone else can, but I
wouldn't bet on it. I don't think it's
going to work. I think he's going to
have more and more disappointment and
upset and he will be busy blaming this
scapegoat, that scapegoat to excuse the
fact that it doesn't work. But the irony
is, and I say this as a critic of Mr.
Trump, that's not his fault, what he's
trying to
do isn't going to work. One final
illustration. Mr.
Biden, Mr. Clinton, Mr.
Obama, both father and son in the Bush
family, all promised in their campaigns
for president to bring
manufacturing back to the United
States. They all promised it. None of
them delivered it. Therefore, it would
be very
naive to believe that Mr.
Trump is going to be able to do what
none of them were able to do. Is it true
that he's going further going to more
extreme efforts? Yes, he is. To his
credit, he clearly understood that the
others
failed. But I must tell you, looking at
what he's trying to
do, I don't think so. And if I had to
point to a single
reason, it goes to your question. It's
because for the first time in a century,
the United States has a
serious
economic
competitor. I'd like to remind people,
and boy, the Europeans seem to need it
these days. That may not include the
Norwegians, I don't know. But in any
case, the the GDP of the United States,
as I said before, 25, 26, 27 trillion.
The GDP of Russia today maybe four
trillion. In other words, the United
States and Russia were never economic
competitors. Russia was much too poor.
The notion of the world divided between
the United States and Russia was a
caricature should never have been taken
seriously by
anybody. Did the Russians have nuclear
weapons? Yes. Did that make them a more
serious adversary?
Yes. But
economically, no.
That's why even today these notions that
the Russians are the ones that have to
be held back as soon as the war in
Ukraine is over they will become this is
the cold war
craziness that has to stop at some point
because it is phony. It is it is a
misunderstanding and this is not a
support for the Russians. You know, I'm
not a fan of Mr. Putin or anything like
that, but it's just looking at the
reality. You can't sustain war without
an economic
foundation. Every war shows
that. You know, the the Russians have
worked very hard to have a big military
and look at them. Are they winning in
Ukraine? Absolutely. Will they win this
war? They already have. But it is taking
them now three
years. And they are 10 times the size of
Ukraine. And yes, the Ukraine's having a
lot of help from the Europeans and the
Americans, but nonetheless, look at the
limits of what Russia can do. and it has
mobilized a million people to add to its
military in order to fight this war.
They can't fight Europe is silly. They
can't they can't even fight Ukraine and
Poland at the same time, let
alone. That's just propaganda which is
so bad that it it's being believed even
by the people who should know better
because they understand these things. So
for me, this is the setting for the
so-called trade war. And the most
important thing about it, and I say this
as an economist, is not this or that
tariff. It's the uncertainty. It's the
fact that Mr. Trump says it's going to
be a tariff. Then there isn't one. Now
it's 25%. Well, now it's 10%. Now it's
200%. Now it's This is impossible. What
this does is negate what the whole
tariff was supposed to do. I give you a
simple
example. If you're a a manufacturer of
automobile parts and you have a factory
in Mexico, which many of them do, you
did that over the last 30 years because
of NAFTA, because of the agreement that
goods can flow from Mexico into the US
like from Canada into one another of the
three countries without a tariff,
without any obstacle free trade. So you
could take advantage of the much lower
wages in Mexico, produce it there, put
it on a truck and drive it across the
border into Texas, no problem. Very
profitable. They all did
that. Okay. If you put a tariff, which
Mr. Trump has said he's going to do
against all goods coming from Mexico
into the United States. You're doing
away with those
profits. And the idea we're supposed to
believe is that the company with the
factory making the goods in Mexico will
now move the factory into the United
States, making the Mexican workers
unemployed and giving jobs to Americans
instead. But here's why it won't work.
Even if the uh tariffs stayed in
place, the problem is that the American
worker remains much higher paid than the
Mexican. So how is the American company
or any company, European company, how
they going to make a living because they
avoid the the tariff, but they have to
pay the much higher wages? This is a
very iffy
proposition. But even that is not the
end of the story. The end of the story
is you don't
know whether this tariff will be in
effect next week, next month, next
year. And so you're not going to make a
very
expensive
timeconsuming movement of your factory
from outside to the United States when
there's so much uncertainty. You could
end up spending a fortune. move your
factory, lose business for two years as
you move it, only to discover that the
tariff that provoked your movement is no
longer in place. Why not? Because Mr.
Trump is bargaining. He wants benefits
and he will in exchange get rid of the
tariffs or lower them very
drastically. You see, you don't know. It
may be much much less expensive to pay a
10% tariff than to undertake the
movement of a factory which is very
likely to be the case in many many uh
industries. So all of this is
very iffy, very
questionable, very much not a cut and
dry thing. And Mr. Trump's up and down.
this last week he said oh yes of course
these tariffs on China will come way
down they won't be zero but they'll come
okay well you know every every boardroom
if every Chinese company took note of
what he just said and whatever decisions
they made are on hold and by the way if
you understand capitalism and how it
works you'll know that if the employer
class the 3 or 4% of the people in any
country who are employers and who
therefore make the decision how much to
invest, where to invest, what to invest
in, those people are holding back now
trying to figure out will Mr. Trump
prevail? Will the opposition emerge?
Will he lose the midterm elections next
autumn, etc., etc.? If a business
community holds back investment, then we
have a recession. And here in the United
States, I can assure you the number one
topic I I'm talking to you from downtown
Manhattan. I I can walk to Wall Street
from where I'm sitting now. The number
one conversation here is not about
whether we're going to have a recession,
but only when it will hit, how bad it
will be, and how long it will last. And
I don't know if the rest of the world
understands this, but that's what the
Wall Street people whose lives and
incomes depend on this, that's what
they're talking about. And that's been
true now for the last three weeks. And
there's no end in sight.
Yeah, I was going to say if I was an
investor, I would Yeah. would possibly
look favorable upon some tariffs if it
provided some uh protection or Yeah.
competitive advantage for my industry,
but I would uh before you start building
factories and training workers, you
would like to know if it's going to stay
up for more than 20 minutes, I guess.
But it's um not ideal, right? And he's
making
it and you know, he c he's not stupid. I
mean and he has around him people who
will explain to him you know ever ever
since John Maynard Kanes did his work
which if you ever read it is premised on
the notion of uncertainty and how
powerful a force that is in a capitalist
economy because of the private
enterprise decisionmaking which is
always do we invest now knowing ing that
it takes several years between the
moment an investment decision is made
and the time when the output comes off
the assembly line. You you always have
to guess. You always have to make a
guess about what it's going to be like 2
years, four years, 6 years, which no one
can know. It's only a guess. And yet you
have to commit now to something whose
profitability you can only guess about.
That
means anything that would disrupt
guesswork is immediately dangerous. Of
course, if you had a rationally planned
system, knowing what Mr. Kanes taught
us, you would not allow that to happen.
you would make sure that investments
continue regardless of the guesswork.
It's a but that's already then we're
heading over into the area of socialism
and as you know at least in our country
uh that's a taboo. You can't discuss
that and you can't discuss sex and you
can't discuss several other topics of
great interest but are taboo.
Um what are good indicators though of a
economic or imperial decline or or even
economic collapse? Uh what is it that
you're looking at? Is it the out the the
failure of reinvesting money back into
the US? Is it the extent of the
debt? The I I'll give you several. Yeah.
Uh seven. and and they're so obvious
that
uh my wife is a psychotherapist so I
borrow concepts and language from her
practice. Americans are caught in a in a
syndrome for which the key word is
denial. They don't want to see
something. It is urgently important not
to see it. You know, it's like a love
affair if it ends. One or the other of
the partners don't want to see the end
because very painful and they wish it
weren't the case. And so, you know, the
the famous remark here in America, you
know, only your best friend will finally
tell you having observed that this is
over now. Right? So, I I have
compassion. I am an American. I was born
here. I've lived here all my life. I've
worked here all my life. I'm sitting in
New York City, which is the financial
capital of this country, etc., etc.,
very hard. And so, they don't see it.
But it's all there. So, let me begin.
The United States went to war in
Vietnam 30, 40 years ago or longer 50
years ago.
And we our enemy there was the Communist
Party of Ho Chi Min in North
Vietnam. The United States lost the
war. The United States is a big powerful
rich country. Vietnam, let alone North
Vietnam, is the opposite. Poor been poor
a long time. very limited military
resources and on and on and on and the
United States
lost. Who runs Vietnam today? It's the
Communist
Party that was the adversary in that
war. Who runs Afghanistan today? The
Taliban. Who was the enemy of the United
States in that war? The Taliban. Who
left Afghanistan? The United States.
What did the United States do in
Afghanistan? Fight a war which it
lost. It went to war in
Iraq. I don't know exactly what they
thought their goals were, but they
didn't achieve them. and they're now
losing in Ukraine, which has been uh a
war between Russia on the one hand and
then Ukraine slash the US on the other.
Okay, these are signs of a serious
problem for an
empire because it has fought several
wars with countries much smaller, much
poorer, much less militarily organized
and
lost over and over again. That's a sign
of an empire in trouble, but it's the
least of it. Here's another
one. In economics, we have a measure.
It's a very crude measure, but it's a
measure of the size of an
economy. It's called the GDP, gross
domestic product. Many people know about
it. Um, and we measure it for all
countries in the world. Each year we
have a number that tells us what is the
rough size. It's just adding up the
total output of goods and services in
one calendar year in a country. Okay.
the GDP of the United States and its
major allies known as the
G7, that's the United States, Japan,
Canada, Britain, France, Germany, and
Italy.
If you add those all up, it's
about it's seven countries and they have
together about
28% of the global GDP, the total output
of goods and services of all countries
on this
planet. Okay. Now, for most of the last
75 years, this was the center of the
global economy. The G7 accounted for a
wildly disproportionate amount, and they
still do, although not what they once
did, of of exports, imports, capital
movements, foreign investment, whatever,
all of it. and the US dollar was the
currency that they presided
over. Okay. Right. Now I did the same
calculation for the people's republic of
China and I asked what is the GDP
there and what is the GDP of the
alliance that they've built called the
bricks Brazil, Russia, India, China,
South Africa plus another 10 or 15
countries that have joined the bricks
since the original
five. Okay. What is it today? If the
G7 is 28% of global GDP, what is China
and the bricks? Answer. 35% of global
GDP. In other words, and for the first
time since the Second World War, we have
a new world economy.
in which there are two big economic
power blocks. Not one, two. The one that
used to be dominant is now number two.
Not even close to number one. 28 and 35
are far
apart. And the gap is growing. That is
every year including right now including
2024 the rate of growth of
the China bricks is significantly higher
double or triple what it is in the west
I'll give you if you want the numbers I
have them all in my head I work with
this stuff every day I can tell you in
other words the gap is actually growing
worse to the favor of China to the
disfavor of the
G7. Okay, th this is a total
transformation here. I'll give you a
couple of ideas of what it
means. Now when any country in Asia,
Africa, Latin America or increasingly in
now in Europe too when there is a a need
for a a railroad to be built somewhere
or a port uh to be built or expanded
somewhere or a a proper medical system
to be
established, where do the
representatives, public or private or
partnerships, where do they go? Do they
go to Washington and London the way they
always did? Yes, they do. But when
they're finished, they don't go home.
They get on an airplane and they go to
Beijing or New Delhi or Sao
Paulo and they ask for the same
support, an export market, an import
source, uh, capital investment,
whatever. They ask the Chinese and their
allies. Here's what we got in London and
New York. Can you do
better? We don't favor either of you,
but we have to do this at the best terms
we can get. And the Chinese are now
richer and they give them better terms.
That's why if you look at the railroads
being built in Africa, they're mostly
being built by Chinese.
If you look at the big ports emerging in
Latin America, they're all
Chinese. There's no mystery here. But to
not see what it
means, you got to be crazy. You got you
have to have a level of denial that is
stupifying.
If you add up the
population of China and the bricks, it's
between 50 and
60% of the people on this
planet. The United States has 4 and a
half% of the people on this planet and
the the
G7 has under
20%. There's no comparison.
And now that China has shown
us that it can
match high techch development on a par
with that of the United States, which
they have done. Every great high-tech
company here, Apple, uh Amazon, uh
Intel, you name it, has an analog, has
an equivalent in China. And in a number
of
cases, the Chinese now are already ahead
of the Americans. Electric vehicles, no
contest. The Chinese won that. Solar
panels to convert the sun into
electricity. The Chinese and we're not
going to catch up because they keep
making advance.
The best battery for an electric car has
been produced by the BYD Corporation, a
Chinese car company that can now
recharge your car in 5 minutes. Takes
less time to recharge the electric car
than it takes to put gasoline in your
car the way we have always done and
changes everything.
So the problem in the United States is
that when I go through and I could keep
going if you want. This morning's
headline either in Bloomberg or the Wall
Street Journal gives you another way of
understanding it. A survey has been done
and it shows that the number of young
men men not women men uh going to
college after they finish high school is
dropping
dramatically. Why? It's too
expensive. The the atmosphere in the
country is that it's not important.
Universities are not
important. Okay.
This This is as if when I read
that I'm
watching slow motion
self-destruction. This is
capitalism, US capitalism
self-destructing. I teach because I
still teach in in American universities.
I teach like all my colleagues,
leftwing, right-wing, we all teach that
the future of the world economy is going
to favor people with a lot of education
who have technological skills, computer
skills. The more menial tasks are going
to be done by artificial intelligence of
blah robots and all. What are we doing?
The Chinese keep adding to colleges and
universities. We are closing them in the
United States. This is this is
crazy. More and more American students
are going to Europe because they can get
a college degree without paying and
going into deep debt, which is what you
have to do now
here. This is not industrial policy.
This is the opposite of industrial
policy. We are
undermining. And by the way, by not
having young men go to college, you know
what that does to the decisionmaking of
employers around the world, move your
production here? No. No. No. What? Not.
You won't have the pool of of educated
labor you need. You're not going to come
here. You know, it's just you're
watching desperate activity, trying to
hold on and finding it more and more
difficult. And the last thing that might
interest your
audience as more and more Americans are
falling out of the global economy
because the United States is not anymore
a balanced economy.
What we have in this country is we have
the financial center that's New York and
the high tech center that's in
California and
Massachusetts. Those are
successful moneymaking machines. But you
know what that means for the rest of the
country? That they are back. They are
junior partners of New York,
Massachusetts, and
California. and they they have little
enclaves, but the mass of people in the
cities, in the suburbs, and in the rural
areas are in more and more
difficulty. And so what they did in
recent years was move sharply to the
right politically, as you see in Europe
too. That's why we have Trump.
That's why you have, for example, the
rather dramatic shift of the Swedish and
Finnish
political
elites. That's why you have on the left
Orban and so forth.
Th this is
strange, but you're having some of the
same problems that we are, but because
the United States was so dominant, it's
sharper and more dramatic
here. But I make you a prediction, and
of course, I don't see the future
anymore better than anyone else. But
when the movement to the right has shown
itself to
be
incapable of dealing with these
problems, you're going to see a sharp
movement to the
left. And don't be
surprised. it. That's what's coming
because solving these problems requires
two things we don't have. One, a
willingness to see it, how what our
problems are, to
understand what it means to be on the
down side of an empire. And the second
thing we don't have is a
political organization, a political
party able and willing to say that, to
teach it, and to come up with a policy
to handle it. When we get that, then the
left will become a very
formidable force here in the United
States because our left is large. our
organized left is not here.
Yeah, it's uh not going to be a fun few
years we're going into it. Uh I guess as
a brief last question, do you do you see
any ways of reversing it? Because it
feels as if the collapse of empire has
already commenced and I think uh yeah,
you also see this in Europe though. that
uh is what what is is it too late to
reverse any of this? Uh because I I I I
just see Trump's efforts to
re-industrialize. He wants he wants to
do too fast effectively. A lot of the
things, you know, he should, you know,
if you want to rebuild the economy, he
has to look a bit the way the the
Chinese did it, but it did take a few
decades. But I'm not sure if he's
patient enough.
But you know when that left organization
that I'm talking about when it arises as
I think it will it will do exactly what
you just said. It will say we have to
look at what the Chinese did and learn
from it rather than try to destroy it.
It is it's not working. You know, the
American government has designated China
as its big problem for almost 20 years
now. That began under
Obama, if not
sooner, if not even earlier than
that. Uh it's not working. It's just
perfect. It's another example. The
Chinese keep growing.
the according to the
IMF in 2024, the year that was just
completed, uh the fastest growing
country among the G7 was the United
States, which grew uh GDP 2.8%.
all the rest of the G7 grew slower less
than that and Germany went into a a
recession you know and Germany used to
be the engine of Europe and and all of
that you know the va vunda uh of the of
the last 75 years well what was the what
did the IMF say China's growth was in
2024 5% what was India's growth
7% okay this is two and three times
times what the best of the West could
do, the United
States. And so you're not defeating the
Chinese. You're
losing. You're losing. And you know,
when you're losing, you have to face it
so you can minimize your
losses at the very least and reverse the
situation if you can. I don't I don't
see us doing that. I think here here's
the evidence. I would point to if I had
to literally over the last three or four
days the Chinese Xi Jinping their leader
has made it crystal clear you keep
putting tariffs on us we will we won't
go as far as you do the Chinese very
cleverly always wait and respond so that
the blame for the whole process goes on
the initiator the United States And then
they're very careful to raise less than
quite equivalent. You know, that's again
that's theater because at these levels
it's immaterial. Uh the there will be no
and the and the Chinese are busily
organizing how to avoid any trade with
the United States. And now here comes
the alliance with the bricks. They have
an ongoing alliance
with 55 to 60% of the people of the
world. That's their resource to try to
find alternative markets, to try to find
alternative sources. And lest anyone be
under a mistake, let me remind you about
something having to do with the Ukraine
war. when it begins in February of
2022, the the president then of the
United States, Joseph Biden, the
Secretary of of State, um Blinken, and
others said that this was a war that
would collapse the ruble, that would
collapse the Russian economy, would see
the end of Mr. Putin as a leader and
maybe even break Russia up into smaller
country.
Unbelievable. None of that
happened. Russia growth in 2024 was
faster than that of the United
States. That's the IMF. I'm not not my
numbers, their numbers. Okay. So what
what exactly is is it that's going on
here?
Well, the the Russians turned to the
bricks when Europe says we're not, you
know, when they when they blow up the
Nordstream pipeline there in in near you
up there in the North Sea and the
Russians can no longer sell oil or gas
on mass to the Germans and the rest of
Europe. They went to the bricks and they
sold their oil and gas to India and
China. I mean, I'm making it simpler
than it is, but that's the basic story.
They solved their problem. They made the
sanctions fail. The Russia is the most
sanctioned country in the world. The
United States has hit them with
sanctions. Europe has hit them with
sanctions that don't work. They don't
work. They are a failure. You have to
you have to at least admit it, which
they don't. And you because they keep
talking about more sanctions. So they
have to understand doesn't work and they
have to ask why not. And the answer is
the bricks. Well then if you have t
tariffs against China of course what the
Chinese are going to do is look at
exactly what saved the Russians.
And indeed, one of the things the
Chinese are doing is making loans to
Russia to enable Russia to buy what the
Chinese can't sell in the United States.
And it is so, if you pardon me, obvious
that the really interesting question
isn't about the strategy, but the
blindness of the West, of the United
States, and even more of the French and
the British and the Germans. Are you
seriously your reaction to this if and I
don't mean to blame you obviously or for
that matter Norway which you know is not
responsible for this but when I read in
the newspaper that that Fredish me is
going to borrow money in the name of
Europe to build a German military with
$800
billion. I mean, are the rest of you in
Europe going to allow finally that
Germany will have the military? Because
Germany will never be able to intimidate
the United States and China, but it will
be in a position if it has that kind of
military to oppress you again. You know,
I mean, my god, the
perversions emerging from this
blindness, this denial should worry
Europeans. It worries me. You know, my
mother was born in in Germany. My mother
is born in Berlin and my father in
France. I speak French and German since
my childhood. I'm I'm an American. I'm
born here and work here and all that,
but you know, half of me is still part
of the European
uh culture and all of that. And I'm very
fearful. I what what I see is is very
depressing in terms of of their
desperation hanging on to the United
States, which no longer cares about
them. and this this kind of weird
fearfulness about a
Russian wi-i which is nutty, you know,
the Russians have their problems and do
their bad things, no question. I'm I'm
not asking anyone to to embrace them,
but the notion that they're are going to
attack, I mean, it's just Well, I guess
yeah, the problem is if if you need a
course correction, you have to, like you
said, you have to first recognize where
the problem is. And uh I think the
problem is there's especially on this
side of the Atlantic, there's just too
much wishful thinking and commitment to
narratives. Like I I actually worked in
Moscow as a professor there in political
economy in 2018 19 and 20 and I worked
on this greater Eurasia initiative which
is Russia's initiative to integrate its
economy with the east. So when the
sanctions began well really yeah put in
high gear in 2022 I said on day one this
will never work. The Russians have been
preparing themselves so they can
diversify. We cannot but they can. uh
this is going to be a horrible disaster
and instead of discussing whether or not
the you know the metrics of this whether
or not this is correct the only feedback
I ever got was well that's what the
Russians are saying are you supporting
their narratives why aren't you
supporting our narrative I mean it's it
this is the level of intellectual
discourse now it's there's no course
correction it's just you know if you
support us repeat we have a form for you
like just say ABC here this is all the
only thing we have this is uh there's no
course correction. We're just going to
go continue digging. It's uh Yeah, we
have that here too. We have that you
make an argument and and the answer is
that sounds like Putin's
narrative. Exactly. We get exact and you
look at say you know I mean I don't care
about Mr. Putin and nothing I don't like
him is nothing you know I have a
daughter who very angry at Putin because
of the
misogynistic treatment of women
and but you can't get anywhere with them
they don't want to think about it they
don't want to hear about it and it it's
extraordinary you know what would
interest me and obviously it's your
program but if if someone like you
especially with your
experience would help us because here in
the United States there's consternation
about why the
Europeans would be holding on to this
narrative of the terrible, awful,
horrible
Russians. Why? I mean, you could be
critical of them. They did this or that.
That's not a problem. But this this
overarching
notion sort of this domino theory that
if you let Ukraine if you don't support
Zilinski well then they are that they
will come through uh you know Ukraine
and take over everybody else. I remember
when when I hear that here, I remember
telling them during the Vietnam war, it
was told we have to support the war
because if the communists win in
Vietnam, then they will take over Laos
and Thailand and Malaysia. None of that
ever happened. They won in Vietnam. End
of story. You know, all of these
terrible domino theories were never
never ever true. It is very
strange strange. It's exactly the same.
Now after Ukraine, it will be Poland.
They keep telling me I ask for evidence
and that's uh then they say, well, are
you spreading Putin's narrative? So
anyways, Professor Wolf, uh, thank you
so much for your time. I always
appreciate talking to you. My pleasure.
And please send us a link because we
will be happy to post it as well on our
uh, media. We'll do. Thanks again.
Bye-bye. Bye.
