Hi everyone and welcome back. We are joined today by Michael Hudson, one of the world's great political economists to discuss uh the development of a multipolar international economic system indeed being built as we speak in China. So uh welcome uh back to the program. >> Well, thanks for having me. So many things are happening right now. Yeah, it's it's incredible how yeah fast the developments are coming. But if if you want to see how extraordinary this is in a relatively short period of time if we look over the past three decades uh because if you remember at the end of the cold war uh the main foreign policy objective of Russia was to integrate with the west to have a common European home or or a greater Europe. And then of course we saw over the past uh decades now that the NATO expansionism it began to push Russia closer and closer to China instead and after 2014 it really abandoned greater Europe in favor of what he calls greater Eurasia. And uh and uh Trump when he came to power he seemed to recognize this mistake uh almost paraphrasing Henry Kissinger as he said that this was a huge mistake uh to to push uh Russia into the ch to the arms of China. However, then we seen how a colossal foreign policy mistake being done all these threats uh tariffs and threats. So again of secondary sanctions against India now pushing India also towards not just China and Russia. So we now see that role meeting in the Shanghai corporation organization meeting in China and forming new partnerships. So it's really extraordinary. I I was wondering how you read this whole situation. Well, the interesting thing is that while Trump has uh represented really the deep state in declaring war against the whole rest of the world, the only war that he's really won is against his own allies, against uh Europe, uh Korea, and uh Japan. He's driven the rest of the world together. And it it is this actual uh neocon warlike uh belligerance that has somehow unified uh the rest of the world to take the steps that they're they're taking right now just about a half year after Trump took power. And what's happening is a geopolitical realignment as you pointed out and the whole theme of uh this uh meeting of the Shanghai cooperation organization was global governance governance that is what uh President Xi was saying and it's not just the governance of the SEO countries it's against uh it's for all of the countries that have been driven out of the US orbit and of course the catalyst for all this that set the stage was the uh Trump's tariffs against India. uh India's Prime Minister Modi uh spent an hour riding in pre a limousine with President Trump and discussing relations between India and uh and Russia and Trump had said uh basically told India we're going to block off the American market for you and that's going to create chaos in your economy if you don't stop importing oil and energy from Russia. Well, what Modi said uh and explained to the audience was that India's trade in oil is much more important for its economy than its trade with the United States. Getting oil to power to power its industry, whole economy uh and to make uh money in trading with the balance of payments is more important than producing uh low low wage un uh textile labor and other labor that the United States had companies had hoped to use India as a counterweight to China. they'll say, "Well, we don't need Chinese labor to make uh iPhones and other products. We can use Indian labor." Uh all of that is is ended. And as we uh right after the SEO meetings, we're going to be leading right into the uh the bigger meetings uh of bricks and the uh Indian prime minister Modi is going to be uh the head of bricks for the next year because it's India's turn to become the host of bricks and they'll be meeting in India. Well, just a month before these meetings, everybody was, you know, worrying that India was the weak uh uh part of the weak Lincoln bricks because it was in a way very much like Turkey. It was trying to play uh uh both the US world and the uh uh China bricks world uh uh both ways and Trump has closed off the option of siding with the United States despite the fact that so many uh Indian uh billionaires or wealthy uh businesses are tied to the United States. uh Modi has uh realized that the the future of the India's economy lies with Russia, China, Iran and the rest of uh the the BRICS region. So all of that was sort of uh the setting for all of this and the the what was made clear the whole theme of the uh speeches by Putin and uh she and the others is that we are now uh 80 years since uh World War II ended and uh the United States had pretty much a free hand in designing the international economic order, the international monetary fund, the world bank, the world trade organization and the cold war uh all on its its own terms and these terms promised to be multilateral and they promised to be the terms that underlay the United Nations charter above all multipolarity uh equal treatment of other countries not selective tariffs not sanctions uh against uh uh some countries being told who you can trade with, who you can invest with, uh what you have to do. And all of this has been violated with at an accelerating rate by the United States neocons in their cold war. And so what uh the way that President Xi uh the host of the uh these meetings and and they moved to China for the big milit to Beijing uh for the big military parade uh I guess uh later today in China uh China time uh is that we are now going to pick up where 1945 was supposed to lead to an alternative to fascism, an alternative to Nazism, an alternative to the militarism of uh Japan. And uh President Xi was pointing to China's role in defeating Japan just Russia's role in uh defeating uh Germany and the the access and uh the great sacrifices they made and that uh they despite the fact that in their narrative they really won the war against uh uh the Axis powers. The fact is that it was the United States that designed the post-war world. The United States that hired as many Nazi scientists and Nazi politicians as they could in Operation Paperclip and hired them to fight communism in Latin America, in Europe, and other countries. Hired their scientists, Verer Brown, etc. for the US space program that uh it was the United States that somehow didn't really end World War II and now that you have in Germany uh Chancellor Meritz saying uh we're going to refight World War II and this time Germany the German army is going to beat the Russian army. This this is really the setting that has uh consolidated the uh the BRICS countries and and the result is that there is a global fracture that's occurring but it's different from all of the attempts to do that really for the last 70 years. uh in 1954 the uh non-aligned nations got together in Bandung, Indonesia and said we we need a more fair and equitable order that uh lets us develop and doesn't uh stifle our development with foreign debt with free trade with preventing us from protecting and subsidizing our own industry. But they really couldn't do anything about it because they were two small uh acting by themselves. They they uh the the non-aligned nations could not go it alone even together because they didn't have the critical mass. What's changed all this since the 1990s obviously has been China that now uh China uh can be the core of this critical mass largely because of its uh financial policies, its foreign exchange reserves, its economic power, its export power, its technology power and uh this has enabled for the first time uh countries outside of the US and European orbit. I think we've discussed this before to create an alternative and that's these meetings at the SEO uh that are going to be followed by the BRICS meetings uh in a week or so are all about spelling out exactly how they're going to restructure this uh new economic order. And they're powerful enough to do it this time. And it's obvious that uh there we can see that uh trade is going to be a key in this. Uh the United States is trying to weaponize foreign trade by saying we can force you to follow our political directives like isolating Russia and China and joining the US cold war against them by blocking all off your access to the United States market. Well, that's weaponizing it thing saying we can cause chaos to you if you don't follow our advice. So, uh the alternative to this is I think all of the speakers spilled out in Tenzhin were well uh we'll trade among each other. If we don't trade with the United States, we'll give up the uh the uh US market. In fact, India has no choice but to give up the US market. If Trump's uh tariffs are allowed to stand against India, they'll trade with themselves. And all of this has a military uh dimension and that's what uh became the underlying frame for discussing all of the uh economic and financial and uh related changes. It's a civilizational fight uh to uh to restructure the whole uh means of uh foreign trade and finance. It's going to ddollarize that. Uh there President Putin pointed out how much more efficient China's uh means of trading uh among themselves in their own domestic currency was from having uh Russia uh buy dollars to pay China and dollars and for China then to convert the dollars back into its own currency. there all of this foreign exchange uh and the charges for it no longer uh have to be borne quite apart from the fact that the United States has weaponized international finance by expelling uh Russia, China, other countries from uh the swift the bank clearing operation. So everything that Trump has done to isolate other countries financially, commercially, in trade, militarily has had just the opposite effect. It's driven them together. And uh the uh all that really the SEO and BRICS countries and global majority had to do was well if we're going to act together uh as a unit how are we going to set the rules of trade the rules of finance so that uh it's something that will be multilateral a word that kept coming up um and uh fair. How do we ddollarize so that the United States can't grab our foreign exchange as it grabbed Russia's $300 billion or gold as uh the Bank of England grabbed Venezuela's gold supply or or others. So you you're you're having this global fracture spelled out in the way of of saying well we it is not so much that we're creating a new civiliz uh type of civilization. We're picking up civilization where it was interrupted by the United States cold war uh that has transformed finance and uh trade to in violation of all of the United Nations principles that we were promised at the end of World War II would be uh subsidized and supported by the United States. That's that's basically the the framework that that has occurred. Well, I just read that this morning uh China and Russia signed uh an agreement finally on this uh power of Siberia 2 massive gas pipeline. Now this is it's not a energy field. It's not gas fields in the Asian parts of Russia which is being exported. This is from the Yamal Peninsula in the Russian Arctic. And this is a massive amount of gas which will go to China. And uh this was previously intended to be exported to Europe. Um for through well primarily then the Nordstream and Nordstream 2 pipelines to Germany. As we know these pipelines were destroyed. They initially tried to blame the Russians but then they had to walk this back. Now they're trying to blame the Ukrainians, but I think most people would assume that the US had something to do with this. But this is just uh you know a huge huge development because it really cements Russia's pivot from Europe which it again dreamed of since this common Europe since Gurbachov's concept of a common European home all the way to 2014 and then in 2022 it began to abandon it completely. But but now of course signing this which all all of this gas which was supposed to fuel all this European industries for decades to come will now instead go to China. And uh I'm just wondering what future historians will say because the Europeans are still celebrating that uh they liberated themselves from Russian gas and they don't have any alternatives except much much more many times more expensive American gas which might not even be available in the future. So it is just it is amazing to see what is happening. But anyways there's no really reversing this because now >> that's the point. This is >> irreversible world >> once you make a huge investment like this. You're not going to say oh you know uh we wanted at one point to be a European nation. We thought of ourselves as European but we're not going to somehow tear down this pipeline and build a new one to Europe. Trump has made it clear, I'm sorry, Putin has made it clear that the break with uh Europe and especially Germany is going to take many decades uh to be restored. There's not uh Russia has come to terms with the fact that it's probably not there's not going to be a uh reopening of uh the Nordstream uh pipeline to Europe. uh there there could be uh for for gas but it's it's up to Europe but Europe is really uh been locked in to the US orbit and it's as if the whole effect of this of the cold war the whole uh Trump strategy against uh Russia and China has been to lock uh Europe into dependence on the United States for liqufied natural gas and especially for mil for one of the uh bases of its balance of payments, military arm sales. uh Modi had said complained that uh actually Trump had uh announced that he had brought pressure on India to buy more American arms and he'd criticized India for buying US weapons and uh I don't think uh Modi came right out and said well our weapons work and your weapons don't as we've been watching the war in Ukraine uh unfold uh it it He didn't say anything but it's obvious the fact that uh the United States has lost India as a major purchaser of its very expensive uh aircraft and missile and uh other uh military uh industrial complex uh arms. So this this is a a blow uh to to the United States and but it's it's locked in Europe uh to uh American arms purchases and the whole uh Trump tariff deals with Europe have just uh uh created such a surrender of the European economy to the United States, locking itself in uh denying itself the choice of trading with uh the BRICS countries, the Asian countries that are the most rapidly growing uh economies in the world. Uh they uh that you're you're having political uh uh bully revolution in uh uh in Europe saying we've got to get rid of the ruling parties. We've got to have nationalist parties. And uh as you and I have discussed here before, it's amazing that all of this is still occurring almost entirely on the right wing of the spectrum, not the left wing of the spectrum for for nationalism. But at a certain point, uh Sarah Vagen's party in Germany and other parties uh in in in Britain are going to replace uh the neocon uh US parties. But it it's it's to as you said it's the irreversible break has already occurred. there's nothing really that that can happen uh to Europe and and uh so the whole identity of and structure of how the the rules that the world is going most of the world is going to be following are going to be the rules that are decided by China, Russia, India, the bricks and the global majority and they're going to leave not only the United States isolated but Europe isolated with it and in view of the fact that In the last few days, Vanderlayan and Germany and uh the well the EU uh have announced their intent to supply missiles to Ukraine and attack Russia. This this is uh just locking in the irreversibility of isolating Western Europe from uh uh from the rest of Eurasia. It just the I wanted to ask about the Indian the the the treatment of India because it just seems to be so well out of place. I mean, well, just for context, like for me, the critical point was a decade ago. Indeed, I wrote a book uh a decade ago called Russia's Jew economic strategy for greater Eurasia because in 2014, it was such a pivotal year, that is we saw uh the same time as the West uh backed this coup in Ukraine, which killed uh Russia's hope for a common Europe. Uh this happened around the same time as the Chinese were launching their belt and road initiative by land and sea. The same time that the Chinese were launching this Asian infrastructure investment bank. The same time they were launching this China 2025 to develop leadership in key technologies. So you saw the format for new technologies, industries, transportation corridors, banks, different currencies all coming out at the same time in China as they topple the this government in Ukraine. And for me it was just amazing because for the first time you had a country like China which had both the capabilities and the preparedness to challenge the US- ccentric economic system and this was the time to kill Russia's dream of being able to integrate with the west. I mean it was it was uh yeah kind of extraordinary. If you wanted to sabotage yourself this is kind of what you would do. And uh which is why I think the past decade was kind of predictable in many ways. But now uh we've seen Russia and China kind of leading this Eurasian front in order to develop an alternative economic system. But but India was always the the wild card because they they they have a bit of a yeah difficult relationship with China and of course they they yes so they can always not always but it's possible that they can uh will be used by by the United States indeed whenever there's some tensions between China and India there's a little bit excitement in the media that well now maybe they will fall in line and join anti-China China block but but this this kind of threats against India I just I can't understand it and it doesn't appear that Washington's walking it back only today I was watching Navaro make some speeches that uh you know you India you're not allowed to buy Russian energy or you shouldn't buy Russian arms and you know we like Moody but this is unacceptable I've been on several Indian TV show about political programs and then they're all just amazing At least the some are think it's hilarious, other are angry. It's just but they can't believe this is real. Like how why why why should Washington dictate to India who it can trade with? It's just it seems absurd. But when you listen to people like Navaro, it's like the most natural thing. I I just was how do you explain this uh this treatment of India because this could have been America's best friend. It's quite extraordinary. Well, you use the word unacceptable, and that's what's so ironic. It shows that the United States didn't have any uh accurate calculation of uh the costs and benefits of what it was doing. The you think of what the word unacceptable meant, how when the United States, we won't accept it. George Bernard Shaw had a story that he was at a party and uh some woman came up to him and uh was I think a yoga she'd returned from India and said to him very proudly I accept the world and George Bernard Shaw said well madame you don't really have a choice do you well that's the situation with the United States it can uh when it says it won't accept the inevitable this doesn't have uh much effect on reality at all. It's like King Canoot trying to stop the uh uh stop the ocean uh to stop the tides from from coming in. There's it has no effect at all. and the most policy makers I think the whole uh all of the statements that includes from the beginning of the uh NATO's war in Ukraine uh to th this week even today says that well uh Trump's strength and his power over the uh other countries that's enabled him to announce his liberation day tariffs is other countries need the American market because the disruption is going to be so great that the alternative to joining as allies with the United States is chaos. Well, obviously in Beijing and uh uh Moscow and now uh New Delhi uh they've decided well it turns out that our ability to uh ex accept a disruption in trade is much better than America's and Europe's ability to uh to accept it. that uh the our trade it's it's not that hard to replace the American market for these countries. China has already uh shifted its soybean demand away from the United States 100% to Brazil. The result is that soybean prices now are collapsing in the United States. uh the uh agricultural sector that is a key political sector in the United States ever since the 1930s is uh really suffering as a result of the losing uh the Chinese market and uh and now other countries that are allied uh with the the bricks uh and the China, Russia, India and other countries uh of the global majority are able to restructure trade among themselves. There's uh obviously going to be a short-term cost. There going to be layoffs. I'm I'm sure that there are many um textile uh companies in India that all of a sudden have had to stop. Uh it may be that today's ruling by the Supreme Court that Trump's tariffs are illegal uh may give hope that well gee maybe these tariffs will have to uh be uh uh uh cancelled. That's not going to have any effect at all because you have both uh the Republicans and the Democrats in Congress completely supporting what Trump is doing. They've supported the war against China. So, uh, this is not going to lead other countries to say, "Oh, now we can open our factories again and begin exporting to the US because it'll all be um turned upside uh closed once again once there's a vote in Congress." Do you support America's war against China? Well, they all do. Uh, certainly the the politicians support it. The American public doesn't. The polls that are taken show the public wants the same things that President Xi wants and that President Putin wants. They want peace. They want normal trade and prosperity. That's not what the senators and representatives in Congress of the US want. They want the cold war. They want uh poverty. They want inflation. They want a declining dollar. uh it's the politicians that are destroying the economy, not uh the the either the voters or the business community that's going to be losing from all this. That's what's so amazing in all of this that the the United States is not really acting in its own self-interest. Uh and apparently it's because uh uh the uh CIA and the National Security Council and the Council of Economic Advisors and uh all of the economists in the government have miscalculated the costs and benefits that are at stake in restructuring this world order. They cannot acknowledge for ideological reasons the uh why the uh China and its allied countries are pulling ahead. They can't acknowledge that a socialist market economy works better than a financialized uh uh uh belligerent economy that's running a chronic balance of payments deficit and of government debt as a result of its cold war. They can't acknowledge that. Well, a lot of the deals which are being made uh obviously they're economic primarily and um I keep making the point that this getting India on board India would never wouldn't want to join anything that will be seen as a group against America because their main idea is they want to be able to diversify their ties and trade with everyone. So it's not a grouping against America but it's a grouping protecting themsel from America. That is if if if Washington wasn't going against India, India would be much more cautious. Uh but now it's you know what what what can they really do and you know I don't think they would have ever subordinated themselves or capitulated to the demands of Washington. But even if they would what what would have been the rewards? We've seen the Europeans have done it. They signed any deal Trump put in front of them. Even though the EU said it was a horrible trade deal, they signed it nonetheless. And they sat like good school boys in front of um his desk. They you know they they did everything uh that was asked hoping that the obedience would be rewarded but it it wasn't. All they did was cut themselves off from Russia, China, Iran, now possibly India in the future too. And it's not actually rewarded. It just makes them more depend on the US which then weakens their hand even more. So you know it would be a kind of foolish assumption to believe that the Indians will go down the same path. Well neither President Sheen nor President Putin in their speeches made any reference to the United States at all. There was no reference. They're not they're not ex expressly describing what they're doing as uh opposing the uh United States and Europe. They're simply ignoring it. They're supporting each other. What they're talking about is let's uh revive the principles that underlay the United Nations uh multipolarity, treatment of equals, no interference in other countries affairs. uh the let's uh decide what is an ideal world order that we can all join as part of a win-win situation and not let uh not permit any of our member countries to weaponize foreign trade to weaponize international finance uh and to to settle our differences on the battlefield instead of by negotiation. none of this uh they've simply ignored the United States. So it's not that India or any other country that's uh joining it is uh aligning itself against the United States. They're saying we're following uh basic principles of that we think are the principles of civilization itself. And these principles of civilization not that have uh uh not only been written into United Nations law but the whole treaty of Vesvalia in 1648 of uh equality among nations, non-inference with other countries, internal affairs, no regime change or covert assassinations of uh heads of state, uh none of this. uh all they're talking about is what is a wonderful world that we're trying to create and if other countries don't want to join it obviously the United States and Europe won't want to join it that they're just uh part of another world they're part of outside of civilization outside of the rule uh the rule of law and again and again uh President Xi and President Putin talked about uh a international national law binding uh all against the US rules-based order uh and they use that uh fairly often and uh it's that it's these rules that uh the Trump and the United has sort of capped uh the United States efforts in all this and u you can just see what u the United States has become a model of what the uh global majority is going to avoid this global confrontation. This uh Trump's demand that European uh companies, Japanese and Korean companies relocate their automobiles and computer and and other major industries to the United States. uh or they permit US companies to control their leading emerging technologies without having to declare uh taxable income uh without uh you know having to pay uh taxes such as even the uh the European countries were trying to prevent American uh companies from doing uh the the United States uh foreign policy is uh uh is based on how can we uh cause chaos in other countries and hurt their economies so that they'll have to side with us. Well, normally if you're going to injure and fight against another country, that's not a way to get them to depend upon you unless you're ruling by fear and by compulsion. And the whole framing of the I the future of the SEO and bricks as their speak speakers have announced uh is going to be it's voluntary that uh it's voluntary because people want to to be mutual gain not a zero sum game which is how Donald Trump has said US relations will have to be bilateral country by country and America has to be the winner, other countries have to be the loser. He said that in his speeches and writings on uh uh the internet again and again and again. So you're you're in a way Trump has uh spilled out exactly the reverse of everything uh that the uh rest of that Asia and the global majority want to avoid. and they this is uh helping them write up the rules that are going to prevent any country who's a member of them themselves is ever going to be able to do again. So in that sense uh maybe he should win the Nobel Prize. He's uh he's accelerated and catalyzed this uh creation of a fair and ideal peaceful world. it just uh doesn't apply to United States and Europe. >> Yeah, the same thought struck me though that there might be some peace prize an unintentional one awarded for bringing together all these countries for example India and China which has all these tensions who are now seeing the need to overcome some of these problems in order to create new economic alternatives. But what I find fascinating though is a lot of this could have been predicted. Indeed it was predicted in in in good time. Um for example in the scholarly work of people like John Roi who wrote back in the 1980s how you would expect the international economic system to develop. You know he was making the point back then that when there is a huge amount of economic power concentrated in hegeimon such as the United States uh it would have the ability to act as a benign hedgeimon because um simply because it would be in in its incentive to create a deliver collective good for the international system that is to have the rest of the international system trusting its administrative control over the international economy. So the United States would be able to say, well, here are your access to key technologies and industries which are reliable. You have access uh to transportation corridors under the US Navy's control which won't be disrupted. You have the access to the reserve currency. We can all trade with the dollar. Uh you access to global finance. And all of this architecture is under US control. And it's an incentive of the US to keep this open and liberal so the rest of the world can access it. And this kind of would be the foundation of um an international economic system which would yeah be considered benign hedgeimon. Other countries would trust it. They would be more or less comfortable under US leadership. However, he also made the point then that when the hedgeimon is in decline, this would no longer work because then the hedgeimon would likely use its administrative control over the international economy to prevent the rise of rivals. For example, China, cut off its access to technologies, industries, uh, you know, stop Iranian access to transportation corridors, seize its tankers, confiscate gold, uh, ban countries from accessing banks, currencies and suddenly the whole economic system is weaponized and now trust is gone. And this is will only amplify the need for alternatives. And again, this is where we kind of are now where we are. It is the United States now to be pursuing some tribut tributary economy where others have to pay tribute or find a way of extracting um yeah industrial power or other yeah wealth from other countries. It's it's just it's it's very shortterm and destructive and so much trust is being lost. But uh I guess my uh yeah what I wanted to get to was while a lot of these deals which are being signed now in China all are economic in nature it's supposed to form a new international system. Uh but what are the key principles the way you see it in this system because it definitely will not be the rules-based international order which is not international it's not rules based and it you know it's not orderly either. So what are they actually going for? >> Well, I'd written uh what you just described up already in my book Global Fracture in 1978. Uh and I think these rules have been spilled out. You mentioned transport. Uh Russia's Prime Minister Lavrov has described re recently uh in a speech just last month. Uh he he said uh talked about the need quote to establish foreign trade mechanisms that the west will be unable to control such as transport corridors, alternative payment systems and supply chains," unquote. uh and as an example he cited how the United States has paralyzed the World Trade Organization by refusing to permit uh a a third judge so that there can't be a three judge uh panel for all of this. Uh the United States uh only has an ability to block other countries from taking moves. For instance, uh the US veto single-handedly has blocked the United Nations from uh denouncing Israel. Uh and you can just follow uh the results of the US veto power. The United States will not join any organization in which it does not have veto power because it says that's letting other countries control our economy. Well, no country is going to have that kind of veto power in the global majority countries. That was uh turns out to have been the Achilles heel uh of uh the the United Nations. 's ability, the ability to the US to block things and simply corruption, the way that it's corrupted the International Atomic Energy uh agency by uh having Raphael Grossy uh in turn over all of Iran's uh atomic energy uh sites and scientists names to Israel to assassinate and to bomb. I mean, this is he's they he leav mentioned a whole bunch of it. So the United as you just pointed out the world is not to be governed any longer by uh the unilateral US rules that are uh subject to uh desperation. uh the US is acting in desperation trying to stop everything and President Putin described this in uh already in in 2022 uh he be he was laying the groundwork for what we're seeing flowering today. He said, "Western countries have been saying for centuries that they're bringing freedom and democracy to other nations. Yet the unipolar world is inherently anti-democratic and unfree. It is false and hypocritical through and through." Well, that's about as direct a statement as you can have. And you can see uh how that many people outside the United States have said, "Well, the last three years 19 2022 to today have just borne that out. We've got to have an alternative." And that's really the point that they're uh this is the first time uh that they've been really pushed into spilling out just what the rules of an alternative are. They can't simply say, "We're going to break from the United States and go it alone." they have to make well what are the rules by which we grow it we go it alone how are we going to uh set rules uh uh so to shape how we trade in a fair way with each other how we finance this foreign trade uh China has announced that it's going to set up a a bank that will be able to extend credit to uh countries that are running deficits with China or paying for China's investment in these countries to develop the built and road initiative and the transportation initiative that is going to enable them all to produce for each other's market instead of for the US uh and European market. But um I guess my yeah my last question is this this is a very different economic system though because traditionally you would only have we only see liberal uh economic systems uh function under the British hedgeimon and then in the 19th century and then the American hedgeimon in the 20th. Uh that doesn't mean that there hasn't been any alternatives. It's not that long since the industrial revolution and introduction of capitalism and all but uh but but in this multipolar system uh what are the opportunities as well as the challenges to create a stable uh economic system. Well, what's so ironic is that what China is doing in its socialist market economy is exactly what the classical economists outlined as the development strategy of industrial capitalism in Britain, France, Germany and other countries in the early 19th century. uh it it has a mixed economy which is exactly where the European economies was were working for saying we're we're going to get rid of all of the monopolies that were created in the Middle Ages uh the feudal epoch uh to enable kings to raise the money to pay their creditors for the war debts that they took on to fight each other. Uh we're going to make these public uh entities so that instead of being monopolies, they can supply basic services uh health, education, uh transportation, communications at a subsidized rate to lower the economy's cost of doing business. Well, that's what China's doing that uh it's really following the mixed economy. And where China has gone further than the uh classical economists of the 19th century went is that it's uh really uh controlled finance in its as a public utility. uh the creation of money and credit is run by the people's bank of China and it creates credit for purposes of direct tangible capital investment to increase production and to uh to fund uh investment that will raise living standards not to make money financially. So the whole structure that you're going to see in the SEO, the BRICS countries and the global majority is going to be to use banking and finance, not to uh fund uh takeovers of property, not to essentially create credit and especially in in in real estate and create real estate bubbles or uh stock market bubbles or run the economy is a Ponzi scheme. but to actually use credit creation and the economic surplus to plow back into overall national production, not the creation of financial wealth in uh the hands of a narrowing financial sector at the very top of the economic pyramid whose product is debt. getting the rest of the population into debt for itself and getting monopolies that extract uh interest, monopoly rent and uh all the financial overhead that characterizes the west. So that's the way that we're really moving into that kind of uh what uh they is described now as uh the new rules of civilization. But they're the very rules of civilization that followed naturally from the industrial revolution to saying how how is England and European countries going to industrialize uh and become make England Britain the workshop of the world? Well, we're going to lower the cost of production. We're going to get rid of the rent overhead. We're going to get rid of the landed aristocracy and its demands for ground rent. Uh we're going to get rid of the uh monopolies and make them into public utilities. Uh and we're going to do what uh Germany and central Europe were doing. We're going to redesign banking so that it's actually going to finance industry, not just finance war debts and predatory uh debt uh without regard for the uh economy's ability to pay and to carry these debts. I know that uh at the face of it I mean it's uh almost obligatory for anyone in the west that we should all interpret these developments as something negative given that this represents a massive power shift from the west to the east and of course there's something to be said about that but on the other hand it has to also be recognized that the system which is now which these countries are seeking to decouple from it seem to have reached the end of the line that is as we mentioned our our economies have become excessively financialized. Uh uh this they're simply not that competitive anymore. Uh the debt has grown to such crazy levels. It's not sustainable. Uh trust in this economic system is is faltering. Uh the amount of economic inequality that's built up. It's given rise to an oligarchy which is being very destructive not just for society but also for politics for democracy to function and as you suggested as well the addiction to this forever wars it's uh you know how long is this going to it's reaching the end of the line it seems so at this point in time if there's no other alternatives uh it's it's strange to me that we have this uh yeah almost instinctive uh hostility towards uh towards these alternatives emerging. But uh again the the alternative to what is being done in places such as the Shanghai Corporation Organization is not to go back to the '9s or the 1950s or this is already exhausted. It's it's is gone. It's I'm just I'm a bit confused by this uh hostility. Yeah. So the German media they called it the in the built they wrote uh this morning this was the summit of tyranny or the villains summit you know of rogue nations that it's just a very strange way of framing this massive historical developments taking time taking place now in the present time. Um I'm not sure if you have if you have if you have any ideas on on the alternative >> class war against socialism. It's a class war against labor. It's a thatcherite regonomics uh demand for privatization. And uh just in the last hour that we've been talking Glenn the United the US stock market is down. The Treasury bond prices are falling as uh long-term interest rates are rising. Gold prices have just gone over $3,500 an ounce, a hundred times their 1971 price. And uh you're seeing the uh the fact that it what the west calls democracy uh is I may have is uh uh oligarchy and uh what it's attacking is autocracy is a society such as China that aims at raising living standards and preventing the kind of economic polarization between the financial class and the uh rest of the economy. uh the indebted economy at large that you're having in the west. So you're really having the the the west for the last century been following an antilass reaction, a fight against the whole ideals of classical economics of a mixed economy uh to essentially fight against government control. It's a fight by the rontier interests. A fight by the banks backing the landlord class and the monopoly class against all of the reforms that you saw flowering in the 19th century before World War I. And all of this counterrevolution is now ended up in tying the United States and Europe in a knot and blocking its development. and uh the uh it's the rest of the countries that are picking up the de development the trajectory the civilization was going in on the eve of World War I before this whole last century has been a long detour of US European uh dominance under a an increasingly unfair polarized financial oligarchy. That's the big picture in my view. >> Yeah. Well, there's a lot of depth to what's happening now. I just wish it deserves some proper discourse in the west. I think it's just depressing to me that the only way they can refer to what's happening in China now is a summit of dictators who hate the west and hate the freedom and democracy. It's a very intellectually bankrupt, but uh there we are. Anyways, uh Michael Hudson, thank you so much for your time. and uh yeah, hope you can come back on soon. >> I love these discussions. They're the big picture. Thank you for having me.