Hi everyone and welcome to discuss the
economic war between the United States
and China. We are joined by professor
Jeffrey Sachs uh a renowned economist who
spends a lot of his time advising
governments uh across the world. So
welcome back to the program. Well great
to be with you always Glenn. So uh we
can look at this uh tech rivalry or yeah
the currency competition uh the efforts
to repatriate supply chains uh however
if we take I guess a step back what what
do you see as the wider developments
here how can we understand this uh point
in history because uh this is not your
everyday trade war this is um it seems
as if uh yeah we've had a western
centric world order now for centuries
and we now see this being contested or
at least not not necessarily the order
but um yeah China is now outpacing the
west that is the world is becoming much
less western centric we haven't really
seen this in a while or at all well this
is the right way to ask uh the question
of what's happening is to take the long
view uh most of of the world population
lives in Asia uh about 60% % uh for most
of history. That means that roughly 60%
of the world economy, world output was
produced in Asia. As best one can tell
when historians look back and try to
recreate economic estimates.
In recent centuries that changed
decisively with the rise of Europe and
of the North Atlantic because in the
19th and 20th centuries of course the
United States rose to become the largest
economy in the world. Asia was eclipsed
in this and not only eclipsed of course
it was dominated by European imperial
powers. If you look around 1820 or so,
Asia was still uh more than half of the
world economy. But by 1950 after 150
years of the industrial
age dominated by Europe and the United
States uh the whole Asian economy had
declined to around 20% of world output
from what had been roughly 60%. This
meant
China completely being eclipsed and in
fact of course attacked uh and losing
many wars first to the west in the first
and second opium wars uh to chaos during
the so-called Taiping rebellion in the
middle of the 19th century uh to the
extr
territorial privileges or rights or
dominance of European powers in China at
the end of the 19th century and then to
Japanese invasion uh in several episodes
starting with the SinoJapanese war in se
in
189495 and then several Japanese
invasions in fact in the 20th century
and the massive invasions of the
1930s civil war in China in the 1940s
and this meant that By the time
of the uh the establishment of the
People's Republic of China in
1949, China had gone through about 110
years of devastating defeats. What China
calls the century of humiliation.
China's share of the world economy uh
was estimated is estimated to be maybe
2% of world output and roughly 20% of
world population uh as of uh the 1950s.
In other words, China was completely
eclipsed from its long historical role
in the world uh for at least a
millennium by the way from 500 to,500 AD
uh before the beginning of the European
ascendancy. China clearly dominated the
world across many
technologies. Gunpowder, the steam
engine, paper currency, the compass, uh
largecale ocean navigation, and one
could go on and on. In fact, so the
story, Glenn, that we see today, taken
from a very, very long-term perspective
in history is the return of China to the
front ranks of power in the world and
economic productivity and technology. uh
in a sense, China has returned to its
more traditional role in the world,
which one could see for much of the last
2,000 years. In fact, the rise of China
in this sense should be
understood as
a rebalancing of what was absolutely
unbalanced and that is a European
dominated world. Of course, it's very
hard for Europeans and Americans to
understand that the idea of European
dominance in the world has become an
absolute natural standby and that's been
true for several hundred years actually
where as Europe rose in power as
European empires uh dominated the other
parts of the world uh full ideologies
belief belief systems uh rewriting of
history uh a lot of racism one can add
even by the leading thinkers of uh world
history in the west came to say well
Europe's dominance is natural European
cultural superiority maybe racial
superiority
uh but whatever the argument
was European superiority is natural. Of
course, now we're at the end of that
phase of history. And one should
understand it's not only the return of
China, it's also the rapid development
of India. It's the rapid development of
Southeast Asia, the so-called ASEAN
countries. Uh it's the rapid development
of parts of West Asia. uh in the the
Gulf countries for example.
All of this is rather
fundamentally ending the eurosentric
view of the world or what in the late
19th century to the early 21st century
became the North Atlantic NATO centered
vision of the world and by the end of
the 20th century became the American
centered vision of the world. And when
you have these temporary imbalances of
economy and power, as I said, you
also put a bull work under them. Or I
say you, I mean the tendency is that a
bull work is put under them in
ideological or religious or uh some
other
philosophical sense to say that
imbalance is natural. In the United
States, the idea of American
exceptionalism is very deep. The idea
that yes, of course, America rules the
world is a deep part of the belief
system, not a
superficial item. So, the rise of China
is viewed with alarm. Uh, it's viewed
with disdain. It's viewed with fear.
It's not viewed with equinimity. I don't
know any American leaders that say,
&amp;quot;Well, of course, China's a big power
that has had a long history of
civilizational greatness, so it's
natural that China's doing well.&amp;quot; Uh,
what you hear is, &amp;quot;China is the great
threat to the world. China's rise must
be stopped. We must contain China. We
must prepare for war. China cheated uh
and stole its way to
economic recovery or return. It's
artificial. China will collapse. In
other words,
many
erroneous,
superficial, biased, sometimes blatantly
racist views to
undergur this sense of superiority in
the US that built up over two centuries.
So I thank you for taking the long view
because that's typically what is
precisely missing uh in understanding uh
the big changes of relative economic and
technological
uh performance in our world today. It's
a
natural catching up of those who fell
far behind in the last two centuries for
a variety of fascinating and complex
reasons. But that imbalance that
developed favoring the North Atlantic
relative to the rest of the world has
diminished and basically is coming to an
end at this point.
This is uh yeah fascinating how the
extreme economic imbalances give rise to
ideologies I guess to explain the
superiority of the where the power is
concentrated I think and and if I could
say Glenn one thing that's interesting
for me and very surprising if you go to
the writings of of the greatest thinkers
in Europe uh for example the philosopher
Emanuel Kant who is no doubt one of the
great geniuses of of Western
civilization. He has scattered through
his writings. It wasn't his main
preoccupation, but a very race-based
view of European superiority. And one
reads that with some shock because he
was the great universalist. He was the
great describer of indeed the
categorical imperative which set
universal standards for behavior. But
the idea that Europe is inherently the
superior
civilization is deeply embedded of
course in a wide range of ideologies
stretching back from the Renaissance to
the Enlightenment of course to the
period of Romantic Nationalism in the
19th century and onto Nazism and other
ideologies of the 20th century that were
based on superiority of race or religion
uh or some other attribute of European
culture that gave the right to dominate.
And this is where uh so much goes wrong
uh in our uh thinking. Uh these beliefs
become deeply
embedded. Uh maybe not explicit, maybe
they're even denied. uh after a certain
point, but they're embedded uh in the
way that our governments, our states
approach international
issues. Was it Emanuel's K's 300y year
birthday last year in Khalinrad and it
did strike me some of the universalism
behind it. There was some sense of
superiority. But what's interesting with
Samuel Hunting, he made this point that
uh um that the western countries we we
tend to believe that we've been ruling
the world for these centuries because of
our superior ideas and values and
ideology. But he made a point that it's
really the mastered more efficient
weaponry, controlled the sea lanes and
got a head start in the industrial
revolution. And yeah, the rest of the
world do not uh do do not ignore this
that it was our organized violence. But
uh but how but it begs the question how
will this lead to a different rule by
China? Because if if the euroentric
world was you all these empires on a
small continent
um how this kind of formed our way of
looking at the world because our
political theorists tend to assume that
you have this unavoidable geopolitical
rivalry that is almost a law of nature.
How do you think China would be
different? its geopolitical mentality
would be
different than for example the way the
Europeans have behaved because we always
assumed it's all universal.
This is also an absolutely fascinating
and much debated question I would say
but I have my own views which I'll share
and that is
that the decisive event in western
political culture if I may put it that
way is 476 AD uh which is the collapse
of the western Roman Empire when Rome is
conquered by German Germanic
conquerors and at that point it was a
long process but with the fall of the
western Roman Empire Europe uh
fragmented into multiple political
entities in fact a
complete complex uh remarkable
kaleidoscope of political entities of
citystates and and kingdoms and dupdoms
and uh every conceivable form of uh
political organization from the Chinese
level up through would be Europeanwide
empires that never quite reached their
billing like the Holy Roman Empire that
Charlemagne in in effect began. But it,
as uh was famously said, it was never
quite holy, never Roman, and never an
empire uh in in the way that it built
itself. But the point is Europe was and
is and remained
despite Napoleonic aspirations, despite
Charlemagne's aspirations, despite what
Hitler uh tried, never uh became a
unified political entity. And today's
European Union is a is is a different
kind and still very weak construction of
uh some kind of uh Europeanwide
political organization. Europe
fragmented and basically engaged in eur
within European war for uh 1500 years
and war became the standard and thinking
about statecraftraft is thinking about
conflict in Europe. Uh and so the idea
that statecraft is anarchctic, the
famous assumption of realism in
international relations theory is a uh a
good first projection of European
reality roughly from around 500 AD to at
least let's say to 1950. And the idea
that states therefore collide with each
other, compete with each other, fight
with each other, conquer each other,
defeat each other, succumb and so forth
is European state craft thinking. China
is very very different in its history.
China unified in 221 BCE uh in theQin
dynasty, the first unification. And
China's uh geographically kind of a box.
Uh the box has a dryland uh step region
so-called to the north, the Himalayas to
the west, the tropical forests of
Southeast Asia to the south and the East
China Sea, uh the Pacific Ocean to the
east. It's a box that became a state, a
unified administrative state more than
2,000 years ago. China fragmented at
times. Uh theQin dynasty gave way to the
Han uh era. The Han era broke apart,
then became later reunited in the Tang
and the Song and the Yuan and the Ming
and theQing dynasties. But one could say
that for most of the last 2,200 years,
China's been a centralized
administrative state. And the philosophy
underpinning China is a confusion
philosophy that emphasizes the
importance of harmony in keeping this
integrated state functioning. Now it's
debated does this lead to a different
kind of state craft of China? My answer
uh is yes. Uh it does actually. China
does not think in terms of western
anarchctic international statecraftraft.
China thinks in terms of a large Chinese
state where internal order is decisive
and where external imperialism was never
the rule for 2,000 years. China's vast
and did not look for overseas
territories. By and large, yes, one can
uh point to particular places and
episodes, but by and large, China had
peaceful relations with its neighbors.
I'll just give one example. from
1368 which is the beginning of the Ming
dynasty to 1839 which is Britain's
invasion of China in the first opium
war. So roughly uh for uh what is that
uh uh 500 years
uh
China did not engage in almost almost
any fighting with its East Asian
neighbors with Japan, with Korea, and
with Vietnam. Uh with Vietnam, there was
about a 17-year period of war in the
15th century. with Korea. As far as I
know, China never invaded Korea even
once, but China was the dominant power.
And in western state craft, you'd say,
well, China would uh would invade and
take over. Never tried. China never
during this period invaded Japan. Not
even once. Uh it was invaded by Japan
once in
uh 1592 I believe it is or at least an
attempt by a uh Japanese shogun a
military commander to invade China. It
failed of course but in any event you
had essentially a half a millennium of
peace in East Asia sometimes called the
Confucian peace. Now when I discussed
this with our our friend John Mirshimer,
a dear friend and a great political
scientist as far as I'm concerned, he
says, &amp;quot;No, no, no, no. China will behave
just the same way as any other great
power.&amp;quot; And he doesn't agree with this
idea that China has a different kind of
state craft. I beg to differ.
I love and admire John, but I disagree
with him. I think China's view of
statecraft is different and it has been
shaped by a different 2,000 years of
history. Professor Sax, it's always
fascinating to speak with you. So uh
yeah, thank you so much and I yeah I
think this will be a key focus in the
years to come to what extent China is uh
its statecraft is distinctively
different from that of the western. So
is I would like to see you and Merchimer
in a debate about this. Thank you again
for your time. We'll continue the
discussion. Great, great to be with you.
Thanks so much.
