Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, June 26, 2025 and our friend Michael Hudson and Richard Ro are back with us. Welcome back. Glad to be here. I'm going to start Michael with what has happened in the Middle East. the new the the the confrontation between Iran and Israel which later on the United States has joined and attacked Iran and it seems that for the time being we have some sort of ceasefire and they stop attacking each other. What's your take on what has happened in the Middle East and the implication or the outcome of those policies coming to the United States? Well, the the ceasefire is obviously sort of let uh uh both sides recover for a week or so, maybe a month, and the fighting is obviously going to continue. And the fighting in the near east by Israel uh and the US fight against Iran is going to continue certainly until the election. And the majority of voters that have been tested in America are against the war. They're against the attacks by Israel on Gaza. They're against the uh America's participation in the war get the extending the war in the near east against Iran. But the leadership of both parties is is completely for the war. And we're in a a very unique situation here. the po the leadership of both the Republican and the Democratic parties is diametrically opposed to what the voters want which is for peace and the fight against the vh what the voters want. The fight against advocates for peace, advocates against the uh increase in the military budget at the expense of social programs is becoming very vicious. And you saw all of that viciousness in the election yesterday on June 25th for who was going to be the Democratic mayor of New York. Uh and I I'd like to show how this is the first uh test of actually how do voters feel against all of this and what does it mean for what the American official politics are going to be uh in the war. That's why this is so official because it was in a way a re very explicitly a revolt against the Democratic party leadership for who is going to be the Democratic uh candidate and it was framed that way and I'd like to give a little bit of background on this. I think the election was about much more as I said against the mayor. Uh it's the future of the Democratic Party and uh the major reason for the opposition to the Democratic candidate uh against President Cuomo is the party's pro-war, pro-Zionist, pro-W wall street opposition to labor. Uh and yet the most immediate uh catalyst for the victory of Zoran Mandami uh in New York was the college educated uh vote young voters and for them uh the major frame of this vote was uh what you've been hearing about for the last few months uh Colombia's university crackdown on the anti-war protest. tests and its punishment of student anti-war demonstrators. Uh this crackdown uh on opposition to the war has dominated the attention of uh the whole graduating class this year this June and of progressives in general. And the these protests are very much like the Vietnam war protests in the 1960s. Most students are against the war. most progressives are against the war just as the uh polls uh have shown and uh so most voters supported uh the students and there was a universal revulsion against Colombia University's president apologizing to Congress for not protecting these uh students uh against accusations of anti-semitism when uh the Republican uh politician was accusing the head of Colombia saying, you know, why did you let students say that they want peace in the and oppose the bombing of Gaza? If if they support Palestinian rights, they are anti-semitic. Colombia University's president apologized and said, of course, she will punish the students who demonstrated against the war. she will expel the students who gave speeches and wrote papers uh against the war. And uh of course she was uh uh she was fired uh when the public abhorrens of uh this uh toying this surrender uh to uh anyone who accused uh one of uh being anti-semitic. uh that that just uh has been uh in the front pages of uh the papers for the last few months because it's not only Colombia University, the fight against Harvard. If Harvard lets a professor write a paper or lecture uh about the need, the support for a two-state solution or opposing the the war uh the bombing of Gaza, uh they're they're being forced out and the students are being uh being blocked. And of course with President Trump uh he wants to ban foreign students altogether. Well the Mandami the the victor in this uh election uh running against the vested interests against the Democratic party's candidate uh who one month ago the was given a 97.5% chance of winning. There was so much money behind Cuomo. There were so many vicious attacks. Uh, everyone in New York, I live in Queens, uh, and my mailbox was filled with large with large uh, campaign propaganda against Mandame. He's a radical communist. Uh, uh, he he's a socialist. Uh, his backers are terrorists. Uh, you you you can't imagine the uh, the extreme. And the fact is that the pro-war candidates, the Zionists, overplayed their hands to such a point that there was a revulsion of trying to uh smear him. Uh and uh it's as if to uh to oppose the war is to be an anti-semite. So this is uh the voters for the first time had a chance to uh come out and say uh and react to this polarization of the economy between the political parties uh on the right-wing of the spectrum, the pro-war anti- labor parties, both the Republicans and the Democrats, and the voters who are not pro-war and are certainly not uh anti-semitic, but they're they're against the war. So uh uh anyone who is uh opposes ethnic cleansing in Gaza is accused of being anti-Semitic. and the fact that a Muslim candidate advocating peace uh when so overwhelmingly against the party uh interest uh shows uh that the Democratic Central Committee's attempt to fight against Bernie Sanders AOC and any uh defender of labor's interest of public health of public spending instead of military spending ing uh is going to uh tear the party apart. Uh and obviously that is going to affect how American foreign policy responds to the Near East. And this is the the Democratic Party leadership is the same that in the 19 in the 2016 presidential election preferred to lose with Hillary Clinton instead of winning with Bernie Sanders. their opposition against what they call socialism which used to be called liberalism or social democracy, their opposition to this, their support of uh Wall Street, of the financial class, of the landlord class, of the military and budget uh militaryindustrial complex uh has uh was responsible for Donald Trump's victory. voters stop voting for the Democratic Party. Well, uh they uh within the you can look at the vote for the mayor of New York is uh a microcosm of what the fight is uh for voters against the Democratic Party. Last year you had Jill Stein the and me on your show uh explaining what the the Green Party's position was against the war and the Jill's uh campaigning in Michigan and the Midwest uh Minnesota was largely responsible for the uh anti-war uh voters not voting for the Democratic uh candidate and opening the war for Trump's victory. the Democrats saw that and and Camala Harris said she'd rather lose the election uh but uh than uh than support the anti-war position and she lost the election by her support of Netanyahu and the the liquid party. Uh the interesting thing is that the uh the as I said the college educated voters voted 3 to one for Mandami. Th this is supposed to be the traditional support of the Democratic party's professional managerial class or the future professional managerial class. Uh Cuomo won largely with the poorest income districts, especially in Harlem. Uh and the very wealthy uh sections of of New York. Uh and the city was was blanketed. And uh he you have that polarization of the Democratic parties uh uh attempt to base its uh its voters on uh ethn ethnicity and other uh identity identities that are not those of wage earners, not those of the working class. that is uh basically uh shows the failure of their divide and conquer strategy and uh the all the polls of the voters in New York is they're they're doing the post-mortems of the election show that they want the Democratic leadership replaced. Uh it's holding on to power. It's denouncing Bernie Sanders. uh members of the Democratic National Committee who wanted reform and said we need younger members than the existing leadership and we have to replace Schumer who is the candidate of the senator from Wall Street and uh Tel Aviv uh that he has discredited himself by the extremism that has polarized American politics and for the first time you're having all of this uh broken out into the open all the positions that most of your commentators have been taking on your show, Nema, are really those of the uh the party. The Wall Street Journal's headline was Wall Street panics over prospect of a socialistr running New York City. And you've seen Trump called him as a communist radical. Imagine just for supporting uh uh rent controls uh for supporting a raise in minimum wage. This is now called communism. This is called radical and it's called anti-semitism. Uh and uh the people who hate Mandami who've been uh funding him the there was a 20 million uh dollar support of the pack against him. the uh the wealthy billionaire supermarket uh owner John uh Katldus said he was going to close his uh his grocery stores uh and if uh New York voted for ended up electing Mandami. Uh hedge fund uh leaders said that they would leave New York if Mandami was there. the current New York mayor Adams was on uh one of the I think he was on the board of Croup and Croup uh uh the most right-wing bank uh in New York uh his is thrown all of its support against uh uh someone else and even though Mandami won the election, Cuomo said he's going to run in the primary still to try to attract get all of his funding to fight against Mandami. And uh the Democrats have said no, please don't run. We're going to back the current mayor Adams. Uh, and we're going to also convince the Republicans not to send not to mount a New York mayor's candidate such as Curtis Siva by offering him a job in the uh, Trump administration just so it'll Cuomo will have another chance to run about against Montame. And we're going to throw the whole power of the press of the public media uh, against them. I think I've given the idea. Uh I I I better let Richard lives in New York too. So the fact is that both of us are right in the center of of this. And I I think it's it it meaning is international in character, not merely local. Yeah. Go ahead, Richard. Yeah. I would like to build on what Michael has said and talk a little bit about further dimensions of uh of what has happened. But I I certainly start off by saying I was dubious that he could do this, Mr. Mami, and I was wrong to be dubious. He did it. He did it better than I thought he could ever imagine doing it. Uh I don't know him personally, but I would guess if he were sitting here, he'd probably admit that he's overwhelmed by it as well. Uh we live in a country that for the last 75 years has basically decreed that any candidate for elective office who accepts the label socialist is thereby committing political suicide and will not be heard from again. And one of the reasons Bernie Sanders is the important person he is is because he broke that taboo a few years ago. And then AOC and the others who have come since have shown us and this is the first important thing. They have shown us that the American people, despite 75 years of unrelenting purging of socialists uh and anyone who smelled or looked like a socialist from public office, from respect, from uh job, from you an unbelievable program of 75 years of something akin to the Spanish Inquisition. position didn't quite kill people although indirectly given the jobs it destroyed the mental health it destroyed the people imprisoned and deported because this begins with the anti-communism right after World War II it is extraordinary that we can see millions of people come out to support Bernie hundreds of thousands to support other congressional candidates starting with AOC and now the biggest city in the country overwhelmingly electing Mamani is a city where the Republican party has very little power. So it's a Democratic city and it's clear what it just did. This is therefore an historic event. No matter what happens between now and November, this is an enormous step forward for the rehabilitation of socialism within the American political discourse and everybody should understand it and that the person who carries that banner is not your charming grandpa Bernie. and is not a beautiful young woman who articulates brilliantly AOC, but is a young man who has the nerve to be supportive of the Palestinians and the nerve to present himself as a Muslim. I mean, it really does tell you of shiftings in the American political scene that ought to have the leaders of the Democratic Party very worried. Number one, that number two, I would like to link the Middle East with this and I want to do it in this way. Over the last 20 to 25 years, we have seen I'm exaggerating but I want to make the basic point. We have seen a shift of the definition of politics from something done locally immediately by people going doortodoor advertising their candidate and leaving a brochure to spending money on the internet on television on big costly promotions. We have at the same time seen the ability of our leaders to basically live and speak and act in their own psychological drama unconnected from what people think. When Michael reminds us that the majority of people don't want war and the majority of people don't want persecution of students who have a view on on something happening thousands of miles away, etc., etc., etc. He is talking about an alienation. We don't believe the that's coming from the mass media. That's why it was possible for Mr. Trump to simply say, "Well, that's all fake media." Because enough people have figured that out. Not just the ones he called fake media. He's a fake, too. And nothing illustrates this more than the last two weeks. We don't know because the political leaders of our world don't tell us what's going on. Do you know what amount of damage the Iranians did in Israel? The answer is no, you don't. You have a snippet here, a a clip over there, but you know, that doesn't tell you very much. Do you know how much damage was really done in Iran? No, you don't. Do you know whether the nuclear target was the real target? You don't know. Did they actually get that target? If it was, you don't know. This is theater, folks. This is all theater. There's something going on. No doubt. And I wish I knew and I wish you knew so we could talk intelligently about what the reality means. But we can't. We are a step back. The reality we have is the theater put forward. And there's a reaction that people have when they figure out each in their own little moment when you figure out that you don't know and now you are angry because you're being played with. That anger showed up in the race for mayor in New York in a very dramatic way. I'm going to give myself as an example. I live in Manhattan. I participated in that vote. The vast majority of candidates never interacted with me, neither where I shop, nor where I work, nor in my home. However, two candidates actually sent a human being. won the local city council candidate. Who won? A young woman or whose political affiliations are the usual, that is to say, nothing. Two young people, excuse me, three young people came to me for mom Dani. On one occasion, two young men and on the other occasion, one young woman. All three were in their 20s. I could see them and look at them. They had lots to tell me about Manny, but I cut them short and told them they didn't need to. This household would all go for Mom Dani. Mani made the decision to his credit to do that to try to reach voters one by one in an endless process of citizen talking to citizen and you know you don't have to be a Freudian psychologist to understand the importance of that is not the words that are spoken whatever they are it's the moment in which A person like you who lives a few blocks from you and has a life more or less where you do felt strong enough to come and talk to you. That's worth a million dollars of publicity. Mr. Cuomo raised money and presented the usual theater. And the people of New York responded by giving him the middle finger. You can't do that in Iran because it's far away and you can't do it in Washington and you can't do it in Tel Aviv. But you are also angry at the theater. One of the few things that we know is real is that what's going on in Gaza is horrific and immoral because we we we have enough of the  to know that nobody disagrees on that. The the Israelis spin it as they wish, the Americans as they wish. We get that. But we know there's something real. Mr. Mandani is something real because he's so different from the normal theatrics. So this is a vote that is corroborated by most of the polls that I see conducted by the Pew uh folks who do very good polling and many of the others. And that is the majority of people in the Democratic party are alienated from that party. And it is true of the Republicans now as well. Mr. Trump is too much like what he promised he would not be and so he is falling into the trap as many predicted he would of so you know accommodating and so he's losing what he once had and I know it sounds far-fetched but if you follow the logic Mr. Mom Donnie is doing a better Trump than Trump can now do and that's why he won. And the trick will be can he sustain it? Can he build on what he has started a good solid foundation a spectacular win? Can he will he get the good advice from AOC and Bernie and the others to help him do that? Or will the assembled theater producers unify themselves the way Michael sketched it and rally behind anybody somebody to try to fight this? their their odds are not good. If they were going to do this, they waited for too long. They don't have a good candidate. Choosing Mr. Cuomo with his horrific record of anti-female sexism and being as polite as I know how. Uh that was a very poor choice to say the least. And most of the others they have don't hold a candle. On the other hand, they have what a politics of theater needs. They have tons and tons of money. Look at the millions that were reported to have been given to Mr. Cuomo in the declining weeks of this campaign from Michael Bloomberg, former mayor, from Mr. uh Langon, the Home Depot CEO, you know, the billionaires lined it up behind Andrew Cuomo just like the billionaires lined up behind Mr. Trump at his inauguration. Everybody knows it's a theater paid for by billionaires. And Mr. Mom Dani teaches everyone across the United States. Every city in America has socialists in it. That's the truth. And they have all wondered, some of them for 50 years. Would it ever be possible that a set of circumstances could arrive into which socialists could move? And the answer is that's what Mr. Mandani just showed you. Yes, New York is different from other cities, but Bernie comes from Vermont, and that's very different from New York, and even AOC comes from Queens, which is quite different in many ways from Manhattan and from the Bronx, and and on and on and on. Mr. Mdani won across most of that. This is therefore a very remarkable moment in which as Markx would have loved pointing out the internal contradictions of capitalism, the financialization not only of the economy but of the electoral process, its distraction from all human interaction. The desire of capitalists to make money by having each of us lost in our little cell phone, lost in our internet box, unconnected to anybody else, so that every human activity is mediated by their system of mass media and mass control. All all that we're watching is a reaction against that. the candidate who can mobilize that Mr. Mamdani in this circumstance yet others we don't know of yet who will pick up this baton if if any of this comes true as I see the possibility and as I know others like me see the possibility we are going to be in for some big changes. Last point, even the theater is now becoming disorganized out of its own contradictions. Let's not miss this. The president announces with enormous enthusiasm of the obliteration of the targets in Iran. Within hours, the intelligence chief of the United States says, "No, it's not clear that we did it. It's in a mountain. We don't know, but it looks like not much was done." Okay, this is a poorly organized theater. You ought to be able to do better than that. What What the hell is going on here? And now the the Iranians, as if they almost understand it, began in the first day or two saying very little damage was done and now yesterday released a statement great damage was done. Okay, they're beginning to understand too that what is the truth here is utterly irrelevant. It's a theater. Everybody's thinking, what do I need to say about this event that will enhance whatever project I have? That's the only question. What the truth of the matter is is of no importance. You know, you can do that for 20 or 30 years. You really can. And then people begin to react to figuring out that's what you're doing. And then it loses. It's like chewing gum. Very good at the beginning, but within 10 minutes, you have no idea what that is in your mouth anymore because it is no longer able to do what it did at the beginning. That's the lesson of every war. Michael made that point a couple of programs ago. The lesson of Vietnam was don't put troops in these countries. A, you're going to lose and B, you're going to lose because your own people will not tolerate that level of death and destruction. So now you have to have an electronic war. Yeah. But an electronic war can't do what boots on the ground. You the contradictions never stop and they never see them, which is lucky for us because we do. Yeah. Well, Richard's given a wonderful description of why uh so many Americans actually uh support uh socialism instead of what we have today. There have been a number of opinion polls uh of Americans and saying uh how do you react to the word socialism and how do you react to capitalism? Most voters sub uh prefer socialism to capitalism as a word and presumably as a policy. When when Richard says there are going to be big changes as a result of this, uh the the change is going to be how this preference of voters uh against the pro-W wall street finance capitalist policies that we have are ever going to express themselves politically in what's become, as Richard said, a financialized uh electoral uh system. Uh there there's nothing I can add to what he said about socialism, but I want to make uh one comment about how Netanyahu's attack on progressive American Jews is splitting them. Uh Netanyahu has said that the greatest enemies of Israel are the progressive American Jews who are not supporting Israel's attack on Gaza. He said that anyone who does not support Israel against uh against the Palestinians is an anti-semite. Well, New York City has the largest Jewish population in the world outside of Tel Aviv. So you you're having here an expression of how the extent to which uh this uh you Zionism has itself become anti-semitic uh and not I I won't say anti-semitic but against Judaism uh Netanyahu and Israel's reading of the the covenant of the Lord backing Israel is a radical misleading of the Jewish bible and when Over the weekend, Senator Ted Cruz said he's supporting Israel and wants to be Israel's strongest supporter in Congress because the Bible tells him that God supports Israel and you have to support Israel if you support God. It's all but it it's all but saying that uh the secular Jews uh the assimilationist Jews, the Jews who are not uh pro-war are uh atheists. But uh this compact of the I want to say something about the compact of the Lord uh with with Israel because it's I've written a number of books on this with the leading Hebraist in Israel uh Baroo Levine uh and by uh one of the leading uh Israeli Zionist professors uh uh from from Yale. uh they're part of my group uh that my Harvard group on the history of uh the economics and from the near east to uh ancient Israel and the his most of the Bible is about a a class war that occurred uh within uh the uh the Jewish community. The Jew, most of the Bible is about what the Jewish prophets accused the Judeaic ruling class of abandoning social justice and letting its economy polarize between the rich and the poor. You have Isaiah, Amos, and the other prophets uh denouncing them for monopolizing the land and putting house to house and plot to plot uh together until there's no room for the population uh in the land. Uh this led to is uh the Israel and the 10 tribes of Israel withdrawing uh from uh the house of David uh saying what do uh what has it done for us? the there's been an oppressive class and while all the covenant with the Lord in the Bible was all about uh the Lord will support uh the Israelis as long as their religion is one of social justice and even treating the alien uh decently. uh the that's not how it worked out with the uh wealthy classes essentially enslaving and appropriating the land of the poor. So you had the the prophets u Isaiah and others saying first of all uh the the the Lord was displeased with uh the with Israel Judaism and let it be conquered by Assyria as punishment for its violating the compact the with the Lord to promote social justice and free the population and u Once again, uh, after the war, the, uh, Jewish ruling class continued to polarize the economy. And so, uh, Isaiah said, "We've we've lost to Babylonia because the Lord is not supporting us if if we don't support the poor, if we don't support the covenant of as spelled out in the book of Leviticus, uh, especially chapter 25, the the Jubilee year. If we don't cancel the debts and uh return the land uh uh to uh the population and liberate the dead bond servants, we're going to be uh defeated again and again because the Lord will not support us uh if we do that. Well, today Israel is one of the most economically unequal economies in the world. Uh there's a very wealthy ruling class there. uh but most of the Israelis are not uh uh so uh uh so wealthy and it's very hard to find social justice or mutual aid or protection and tolerance of aliens as the indigenous pal Palestinians are called very hard to find that and uh you could say that if uh if the Bible says anything it says that Israel will be punished for its behavior against this. This is the exact opposite of what Netanyahu says. So the fact is that the Zionists and the elicid party have a travesty of what the Bible is all about. a travesty about Judaism is all about and also a travesty about how Jesus uh emerged from this class war uh within Judea and gave his first uh speech before the synagogue, unrolling the tablet of Isaiah uh and announcing that his uh mission was to restore the Jubilee year and uh lead to a debt cancellation. And uh there were there we now know there was a very large movement uh uh in Israel. Not only uh Jesus's followers but uh it was a majority of the popular movement against it. It was defeated by the Jewish rabbitical class uh uh uh led by uh by by the rabbis. Uh you had the same kind of class war that that ended up with Jesus's sermon sermon on the mount and uh the Lord's prayer forgive them their debts. uh as we forgive our our debtors. So all of this uh mo the majority of American Jews uh have have played such an important role intellectually and politically uh and financially uh because they believed in universal equality. They believed in uh they were fighting against any kind of ethnicity and total war obviously because they had been the victims uh of all of this. So of course uh they were against uh uh any kind of uh uh racism or uh ine economic inequality because that was why they'd immigrated to America uh to begin with. So just as so many uh Protestants uh from France and England uh the Wigano Hugenos and others had come here. So uh you're you're you're this attempt to characterize uh the any socialist uh any advocate of social justice uh and of world peace as being anti-semitic is uh should be exposed as a travesty that it is. Go ahead. If I could, I want to get yet another dimension of all of this on the table so that we've talked about it and and your audience can think about uh whatever it finds reasonable in it. Mr. Trump became an oddity, a Republican candidate who was very strong for peace. He came very close to what Michael was just talking about. He promised I want to go through this with people. He promised that he would end the war in Ukraine. I believe he said either I'll end it in a week or I'll end it in a day. One of his typical exaggerations. I'm being polite. He he said much the same about Israel in Gaza. He seemed to recognize that by far the most destructive war at the time that he was running for president was the war in Gaza. In other words, the Israelis were killing people at a rate on a daily basis far exceeding which it has what Russia and Ukraine did to each other. Okay? So if anything he was giving us to understand he understood that difference and he would bring wars to an end. remember I'm going to end the forever wars in the Middle East etc. Okay, he has not done that. He has given us a theater of doing it on again off again though he will not stay with Zalinski in in Ukraine. He will uh he's now going to meet him. He isn't going to meet. I mean, unbelievable. But one thing we know, the war is not over. And even if he withdraws, he is encouraging the Europeans to keep this war going, which they seem committed to do because they live in the same theatrical universe that we do in this country. They have leaders who are in a fight against Russia that the mass of those people do not feel part of, do not want the war in Ukraine, will not participate in it. Meanwhile, the leaders keep doing what they're doing because they're engaged in a theater. They are making a theater of the evil intentions of Russia for which there is no evidence and no foundation. But okay, what did he do about the the war in in Gaza? Nothing. He sat by like Mr. Biden and allowed Netanyahu to continue to use American money and American weapons to pursue what was the most horrible of the existing wars. But he has gone further. He's now attacked Iran with whom there was no war before. He gets the full credit for starting a third war in that part of the world. He didn't stop the other two. He made a third. Now we have a a a ceasefire. Both sides will now be reorganizing themselves because it would be folly for either Israel to assume Iran won't bomb it or vice versa. So we're sitting on top of more theater. But now the biggest theater of all which can't be spoken. If it was true that Mr. Trump believed that there might be nuclear enriched uranium enriched enough to be weapon ready in those three sites in Iran and he dropped the biggest bombs we have on them. What could have happened is that the bombs blew up the nuclear material in which case we would have had what? Another Chernobyl. The if we to believe him the risk he took or to throw him out of office. He he risked a nuclear catastrophe, which he didn't have to. Iran wasn't doing anything to the United States at the time. How in the world could Well, so maybe he knew there was nothing there like that that he could defend himself, but if he did, we would get more evidence that it's all theater. as we are getting hints now that the Iranians knew to move their stuff out of those sites just like the Iranians told the Americans before they hit the base in Qatar that they should leave there which they did. So we have we we're at a point which was prefigured by a film made by Dustin Hoffman many years ago called Wag the Dog and his point was a war was simulated if you I don't know if you've seen the film but if not see it a war is simulated ated by Hollywood to achieve the political and other objectives of the people who pay for the theater. That's where we are. That's why Manny won. There is a reaction going beyond the details of Israel or Judaism or any of this. It's the honest expression of a population that knows it's being ripped off economically, politically, ideologically. And whoever can emerge from this bad time with some genuine honesty attached to him or her will do very very well. And right now to my fellow left of center Americans, Bernie has that and AOC has that and now M Donnie has that from which certain lessons should be drawn for all of you in terms of thinking about what strategies you should pursue to try to take advantage of this situation. Mr. Trump is the president because he figured out that nobody had any sympathy, not in the Republican party and not in the Democratic party for the victims of 40 years of neoliberal globalization. White male Christian factory working union members, they were the forgotten. They were the unimportant and he addressed them. I'm yours. And he was brilliant. He focused them not on the corporate executives whose decisions to move production to China to automate and to bring in immigrants that they were exempt. He knew who he had to please. He knew who he was. So he came up with the solution. It's those horrible Democrats who have been favoring black, brown, and female people at your expense. That's why you're screwed. That's why you have no job, no future. Instead of being a union machinist, you're a greeter at Walmart. So turn your anger, turn your bitterness against black people, brown people, women, all the DEI beneficiaries, they're your enemy. Classic. Vote for me. I'll fix it. What does he fix? Nothing. What has he solved? Nothing. We got more war in the Middle East than when he came. But he knew that he could cash in. I'm telling us, learn the lesson. Manny, AOC, Bernie, they have taught us something. The system has destroyed the basis of its own mass support. But we have to act if we're going to become the inheritors of the reaction against where this country has landed. I think what Richard has described so wonderfully as uh the uh the theater of how do you frame the issue and how do you frame the issue in a way that avoids talking about what he's just talking about what it's really all about uh for wage earners in the economy this is the theater of deception and you can say that the uh United Nations and uh Neimas your your guests have pointed out how the international atomic energy authority party has been a theater of deception uh pretending to make the world safe from economic from nuclear war while uh Mr. Graasi, according to the uh Iranian documentation, simply uh acted as spies for the CIA and for Israel to uh turn over to Israel the names of the atomic scientists uh for assassination and to uh locate here are the where we've inspected the actual uh places where uranium is stored for the Americans uh to and Israelis to bomb the Israelis to uh to drop American bombs on. So you're you're having this whole framing of deception is sort of broken away by an uh an intuitive sense of American voters and I bet voters all over the world to realize that this is all deception and uh the dominant politics of almost every country have become based on framing the issue in a way to distract attention from what most voters care about. uh uh the economy, the way that society is structured. So uh what this is really all about is what kind of an economic system, what kind of a political system we're going to have. and the fact that there's a the perception uh now the reality is that the political system of both parties here is corrupted just as the European political parties are corrupted in supporting NATO and the war in Russia against the uh the votes of their own population against the NATO war against all of the polling of the voters. uh you have uh from America to Europe politics versus the voters. This is not democratic. This is the antithesis of dem of democracy. That's what's at issue. Nema, could I add a couple things? Do we have time? Go ahead. Go ahead, Richard. I want to pick up on the on the question of Europe that Michael just raised. the Europeans, the theater there is so obvious that I think Europeans can be expected to give us events like Mani in New York soon. Here's the theater without with the United States uh Ukraine is defeated by Russia. That's we've been watching that for three years and that's not going to change. Without the United States fully engaged, the Europeans have even less chance. So why the demonization of Russia? What in the world is going on? The answer. Russia no longer needs Europe to sell its oil and gas. It can sell oil and gas to India and China forever and do very well in the process as well as cementing a political alliance the bricks which is crucial for all of them. So what is the European plan? You hype the Russian danger. Why? so that you can shift governmental spending from social benefits to militarism. What we're watching is a classic program of military Keynesianism. The government is going to come in, look at merits in Germany, an $80 billion a year rearmament for what? You're going to fight Russia. You're going to lose again. the Europeans, there's no stomach for it. There's not enough money for it. And whatever they could do, let me remind you, 80 billion is the German allocation. The United States in one year allocates 10 times that amount of money. They're not going to threaten or endanger the United States. And they're not going to do that with Russia, China either. It's way too late. But they don't care because that's not the point. The point is with higher energy costs because these idiots sanctioned Russia and wouldn't buy its oil and gas. So now they have to pay too much. They're de-industrializing. Their companies are leaving, moving around Europe, moving to the United States, going anywhere. They have to stop that. Otherwise, they literally become a tourist attraction and little more. And so now they found the way. They're going to subsidize industry at home by an enormous military Keynesianism. And to cover that, to make that fly politically, they put on the theater of evil Russia that endangers all of us from right underneath our beds at night. Otherwise, the absurdity of the Russia bashing would have to be explained. And Russia isn't the reason for it. This has got nothing to do with Russia's job is to be the player the the the the the symbol in the theater for what is necessary. That's what I mean. These are theatrics designed to cover in some acceptable idiom a project that they dare not honestly present. And so we have a pol a political system of theater which has now run out of the tolerability. Even large parts of Europe don't believe their own leaders. Yeah, exactly. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael, for being with us today. Great pleasure as always. Thank you. Thank you all for having us. See you soon. Bye-bye.