Hi everybody. Today's Thursday, October 9, 2025, and our dear friends Michael Hodson and Richard Wolf join us. Welcome back. >> Glad to be here. >> Yeah. Since everybody's talking about the Trump peace plan, I want to start with that, Michael. What's your take on what is happening? You've mentioned, you sent me an email. You mentioned that the what has happened in Gaza is not Israel's war, is NATO's war. What's your point in that? >> Well, Trump told Fox News last night, quote, "The important thing is for people to love Israel again. I told BB that Israel cannot fight against the whole world." And uh Netanyahu's been saying uh that this war goes far beyond uh simply between Gaza and Israel. It's really a fight uh in a ninth front. And that ninth front is controlled uh is h who is going to control how Americans view international relations, the geopolitics of what's happening. And I think if the if if the military confrontation uh stopped at least temporarily uh then all this conflict is now shifted to the political and the cultural battlefield and I think we have to look at that this is turning out to be a much deeper and longlasting conflict than and it goes beyond Palestine and Israel. Uh, I think to answer your question, the war in Gaza and the West Bank isn't simply a military conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, just like Russia isn't simply uh in a military conflict with uh Ukraine. uh the the Palestinians are not in a war with Israel but uh uh but with NATO led by the United States and Britain and Germany and Israel's strategy is well how do we keep the loyalty of uh the the US now that the the opinion polls show that uh young younger people are taking the side of the Palestinians not uh not Israel. What does that bode for continued American support over uh for for Israel? Well, this is a much longerlasting fight and it goes uh the beyond the military battlefield and it's how the world frames the thinking about what's happening to it. And this is the uh deepest and it's even the most threatening battlefield o over control of how to the narrative the narrative of how to frame the issue and what's being taught in the schools and the universities and spread to the internet platforms and the mass media that's passed that is now coming already come under the control of extremist Zionist hardliners. ers and that's what the whole fight uh over the last week has been over uh o over tick tock president Netanyahu has explained that Israel's at war with what he calls this ninth front to control the United States that's the the real war that's happening and this control isn't to be established militarily but by controlling the US public opinion through essentially uh extremist Zionist billionaires who control the uh the Silicon Valley billionaires uh who control the mass media. You've seen them take control of uh uh automatic intelligence to uh to buy out Tik Tok and redesign the algorithms of Tik Tok to replace the pictures that Tik Tok was showing about uh assa murdered Palestinian babies uh all sorts of uh horrendous uh genocidal attacks. All this is going to be out and the new algorithm is blocking any discussion or any any expose of uh what Israel has been doing to Gaza and to the West Bank. And just like Israel has concentrated, the army has concentrated on killing two groups of people. Journalists there must they must destroy any attempt to let the world know what they are doing and doctors. The doctors must not heal the injured especially uh the children who can grow up and growing up with a memory of what's happening uh to them. And Israel says if these children live it is a threat to Judaism because Israel is a Judaic state meaning as Alistister Crook says meaning a theocracy that and a theocracy has no room for anyone who is not a member of the uh Judeaic state. So you're having this war extending to the churches. Uh you know what are the churches going to say? Are they going to say uh this war of Israel against uh the Palestinians is part of uh the Bible of uh the the Lord backing Israel as America's ambassador to Israel uh has claimed that he has to follow the Bible? uh the there's a whole attempt to create this not only a false uh narrative but by uh using the algorithms for all the main internet platforms uh Facebook uh uh Google uh even X uh the if you try to use these platforms and you can now expregate or censor any discussion that is not reflecting an Israeli uh opinion, then you're shaping public opinion. And if you can take over the news like CBS news was just taken over by an ardent scientist, uh you're you're turning the universities uh who are uh preventing any student demonstrations in favor of of peace. They say if you want peace uh and not fighting then you're anti-semitic. We are expelling you and if you're a professor uh who who describes this we will expel you as Colombia University has done other universities are doing. This is a cultural war and that's that's what uh uh is being overshadowed by all of this military discussion. And since neither Richard nor I are military specialists, uh I think that that's really what needs to be discussed uh on your site because you have enough military uh people who are uh explaining the brutality of what's happening. Uh you're muted come from a different angle, but you have your point. We talked about it before. Go ahead. Your >> take. Let let me frame it slightly differently, but I think in a way that is complimentary to what Michael has uh just said. Here's my interpretation of what uh a translation should be better word. A translation of what Trump said on Fox News uh that Michael cited here. Here's my translation. This is not what the president said, but here's what I think lies behind the words he said that he has come to the conclusion with his advisors that the tide has changed in the world that Israel is now losing the u hearts and minds campaign uh that it launched uh and that it did in that area too little and too late and that it could not overwhelm what the reality was of what they were doing to the Palestinians in Gaza uh for the last two years. Okay. And it it's too late. Uh whether you want to give the credit to the the the global critical media, whether whether we we pin another medal on Greta Thunberg, I I don't know. But he's losing and I don't think President Trump cares about it anyway. But what his adviserss have told him is that the tide is turnurning turning inside the United States. It is becoming politically impossible for him to continue the policies of Biden and Trump of of being 100% pro-Israel. More than half the people of Israel are in terms of the war policy. It's becoming danger. Apac for all the money it spends and all the influence it has not prevailed. and he is telling BB, listen Jack, I can't keep supporting you if in my country the the opinion is shifting away from you. I've done as much as I can do. I'm get I'm I'm bailing. You've got to now do and then he says something which is ridiculous. You've got to make the world love you. Well, I know what he means. He means that Apac has to do something to change the direction of American political opinion. And there again, I would remind everyone, we are now a very few weeks away from an election which the polls suggest is going to bring an anti-Israeli Muslim socialist into being the mayor of the largest city in the country. This is an extremely powerful message being sent. Even even if he were to lose the election, it doesn't look like that. But even if he were, look how far he has already come. And from if you follow it, which I've been doing from the beginning of his effort, long before he became well known, one of his key supporters was something an organization called the Jewish Voice for Peace, which is an, you know, a pro Palestinian anti-Israeli war uh Jewish organization in the city that has more Jews than any other in the United States. I mean, wow. You what? And I think they're learning and they're very worried. Marjorie Taylor Green has announced she's voting with the Democrats because she can't go along with the policy of undercutting Medicaid for poor people. Mr. Massie is is relentlessly trying to get the Epstein files opened up. There's serious speculation that the real reason they kept the cong they they shut the government down had nothing to do with Medicare or anything else. It had to do with postponing the deno of the Epstein files. Okay, I don't know whether these things are true or not, but if you put them all together, they suggest that Michael is right that there's a turning point here that this that this issue even the Israelis and the Americans now understand that the military action in Gaza has to stop because it's counterproductive. It is damaging. The whole point was to give them more security. And as the critics have told them for years now, that's not going to work. You're making your situation more difficult. And you're seeing around the world, even among comedian John Stewart, explaining to his audience, that Netanyahu is the one threatening a global wave of anti-semitism. What did he mean? Because of what you're doing in Gaza, you crazy people. You are in the name of preserving yourself, you're killing yourself. And that allows me to say, and bear with me, nothing nothing is more typical of declining empires than having their leaders do things which everyone shouts at them, don't do that. That makes your decline worse. But they can't hear it. They're stuck in these ways of doing things. And I don't know whether Netanyahu can either hear any of this. But that's my suspicion. Mr. Trump is realizing it. He's going to have to choose. It's very clear uh who's going to be sacrificed. You know, the Germans did a did a holocaust. They did a a genocide. And they are suffering to this day with the reputation they have around the world for that. How it's all played out in a million people's minds. You know, you don't do you don't undo this quickly. You know, Hitler is dead in 1945. Here we are 80 years later and we can still see Germany inside the European Union. I I mean my family is part French and part German. I have lived the the lifelong uh effects of all of this all my life. Even though I'm born in the United States, I'm an American and all of that. I I'm fully aware that that is alive and well in a thousand ways. Israel will take a very long time, if ever, to crawl out from under what it has done. >> Right. >> And Mr. Trump is now telling them, "You're going to lose me, too, because I'm not going to sacrifice my political life because Apac is not able to buy and control the narrative the way Michael laid out. It It used to it was very good at it. We all admired in our way how it did it, but we all knew, if you think about it, it wouldn't last forever." Well, ironically, the most aggressive effort to hold on to it, the Gaza destruction is also the end of it. >> Richard, uh, a few months ago, Netanyahu said that the greatest enemy of Israel are the assimilationist Jews. This is relevant to Mandami's uh, running for election. He said because the assimilationist Jews want to be part of their own society, want to be part of their own uh economy, they don't look to Israel. They don't put Israel first. And uh they if the American Jews will put America first, European Jews will put European first. They are the enemy. Well, one friend of mine the other day commented that it's it's as if Netanyahu has read Orwell's 1984 and he took to heart his statement that those who control the present control the past and those who control the past control the future. And so what Israel is trying to do is uh to reframe the the whole past and the whole history of the settlement of Israel from the very beginning. The Israeli Holocaust, the Nagba, uh the mass assassinations, uh the the whole military history. Well, uh as I mentioned, to establish all of this, you have to control the narrative. And it's a historical narrative. It's an ongoing news narrative and it's capped by what students are taught. Uh and I I want to I want to discuss the economics of how this narrative came about and back uh I have some personal experience in this. Back in the 1970s uh more than seven decades ago uh I saw how the groundwork was being laid for the cultural war that was being prepared. I was a Wall Street uh economist and some of my oldest friends were working for Drexel Burnham. That was the investment banking firm for uh corporate rating junk bond takeovers. And I often met with them and their bo I addressed their board meetings sometimes and uh they told uh a number of their uh managers told me that the most important thing to them in their life was Zionism and Drexel was the investment banking firm that developed the junk bonds to take over companies and turned them into financial vehicles to make capital gains. It was part of the whole transition from America's industrial capitalism to predatory finance capitalism by making buyouted offers to take companies uh to make them into financial vehicles. And the main organizer, Michael Milin, went to jail for organizing in insider dealing with Drexel's investors. And the important thing that uh it was has spelled out to me was that these investors were all Jewish and they were more than Jewish. They were Zionists. And the financial details have been widely reported about all of this. But what is not recognized is that there was sort of a personal compact among all of these investors that uh they were going to be made very rich by playing by new roles that the white sho white white shoe law firms and investment companies wouldn't do of making hostile takeovers instead of friendly merger proposals. And uh the deal was they were all expected to give a substantial portion of their earnings to the Zionist cause and that went beyond APEC. it meant to uh supporting the Zionist cause in uh many uh many dimensions. And a few decades later, I met with some of the former Drexal strategists who'd gone on to create firms of their own and they applied this principle that um the in order to join this corporate rating uh and we're talking about the these investors were the ones who took over Silicon Valley and the internet stocks and the information technology stocks. They focused on that from the beginning. They become multi-billionaires and in the case of Larry Ellison, a trillionaire uh now uh they had the uh they were able to operate with a freedom of attacking the economy at large that the traditional investment banks and companies and law firms didn't. Well, fast forward to the last decade or so. You have the largest investment firms are those of Silicon Valley and they're uh these firms are all led by Zionists working together with Israel and the liquid party as well as with Apac active in they're active in US political campaigns. Uh they they're using uh some of their billions of dollars to promote the Zionist cause. And this attempt to shape American public opinion is centered in the financial sector, the and specifically the financial control of the information technology sector, the main platforms for internet communication, the uh the everything that I I was discussing earlier where the information war is being fought including the takeover of uh CBS news uh to promote Zionist positions, the takeover of networks here, the takeover of uh mass media publications and the huge propaganda within the churches, especially the fundamentalist churches to give this fake Christianity uh based on the Scoffield Bible and the idea that uh God told Israel kill all of the non-Jews so that you'll have the end of history and Jesus can come back and send all of us up to heaven and everyone else to hell. This is the craziness that has been sponsored by the uh essentially by by the Israelis uh pushing the gullible Christian churches to uh transform. you know what people think of America as a Christian country uh is not something that either the traditional Catholics uh or most Protestant churches as they existed before 1900 uh would even recognize today. So this is why Trump uh made the deal with China forcing the sale of Tik Tok as part of this campaign along with Facebook and X and other platforms and media to uh to create this Zionist perspective. And the just like uh you remember Hitler created a a fake history uh saying uh that is the world was uh wrecked by the debt problems of the 1920s and the 1930s Hitler tried to blame it all on Jewish bankers. Well, the fact is that American banking and European banking uh was pretty anti-Semitic. And the origin of these international bankers, they were created by the Catholic Church in the 13th century to raise war loans to uh to the kings who were loyal to loyal to the church and fighting religious wars and the crusades on its behalf. So there was this fake history. Uh and the fact is that the Jewish financial presence in the United States was not in banking. When I worked for begun to work for banks in the 1960s, there was a marked anti-semitism there. They wouldn't hire Jewish people. And one bank I worked for even hired a black employee before they would hire a Jew. Well, uh how do you explain the Jewish presence? They were in the brokerage industry. they were in the bro uh the uh the the stock industry the investment banking industry such as uh Drexel Burnham not in not in banking at all and it's this reshaping of the investment banking industry that has cost billion tr bill billions and I guess you could say trillions of dollars and uh the uh part of this uh has been to make themselves tax exempt uh from paying anywhere or near as high in income or wealth cap tax as uh the 90% of the population uh has. So I think it's appropriate to explain how this uh how this uh uh the the economic uh powerhouse of this propaganda attempt that is not only shaping how Americans think of Israel, but because the American internet companies and the uh associated Silicon Valley companies control the large firms that are active in Europe. Europe and Asia. So what you're having are these companies using algorithms and automatic intelligence to uh to essentially act as a censorship that goes way beyond the United States but over the entire world economy uh that uses uh Facebook and X and uh all of these other uh internet Tik Tok. Now uh you you're having something that it it's a fight a global fight to reshape history in a biased extremist Zionist way of a cold war way a neocon way uh a right-wing uh oligarchic way uh you're having the whole narrative become oligarchic co neocon and zionist. That's really what is the context for the fight that we're going to be seeing unfolding probably for the next few years. >> It's very very useful to have this kind of history. Michael is is exceptional in that and he has been for a long time. the books he writes, the articles he writes, the takeback, they answer the question. Other people notice something. Michael asked the question, why is it like that? Why, for example, would Jewish people be prominent in a particular industry, not in another industry? And then how does that help you explain why Silicon Valley should be peopledled by the people that are there now rather than the conventional banking? And he explains because Jews were excluded from ex the re the historical banking. So they went somewhere else and that that becomes part of the history. Well, I want to do the same thing with the with Jews have been split for as long as I've heard about any of this. between those who thought that there ought to be a homeland quote for Jews, a Zion, a place for them. Uh, and and we all know what part of the reason must have been that they were excluded almost everywhere else. Anti-semitism one way or another could lead people to have the fantastic idea gee if we were in a country that we controlled maybe finally we wouldn't be vulnerable to what has happened to us in Spain with the Inquisition in Germany with the Holocaust and on and on and on or in America with the more polite forms of anti-semitism that have long been here and still remain pain and I want to remind people why did Jewish people go into financial issues used to be a a critique that finance angles once wrote socialism uh can be can take a a stupid form his word stupid that's when you think that the problem isn't the capitalist but the Jew anti-semitism is the stupid person socialism was the way he he articulated well Jews were not allowed to be part of feudal Europe. They were not acceptable. Neither as surf nor as vassel nor as lord. So how they going to live? They can't live by on the land the way everybody else did in what was a rural economic system. So they became the go-between. They became the merchant who didn't have a piece of land who moved from one place to another buying cheap and selling deer because that's how you live if you're a trades person. Okay? So they become trades people. But there's no mystery here. You don't need the Bible to understand any of this. You need a little economic history to know exactly how it how it evolves. But that takes me to the point and perhaps here Michael and I disagree. I think he's right in laying it out, but I think one one side is now clearly losing and it's the side that used to be winning. In other words, we're at a point where the former winners, the people who made the deal, the Zionist wing of the Jewish community, which was, by the way, always a minority but an important one, but they they had a lot of resources. They got their little country. They built it up with the help of Jews outside, of course, and with the help of allies like the United States and Britain. But it's over. It's over. Not because they are this one or that one failed, because they're part of the losers in the world economy today. That's their problem. That's Mr. Trump's problem. If he didn't have six other crises crashing down on him, he could give Mr. Be BB more. He can't do it anymore. He just can't. It's too costly. And it has now turned into being costly to him politically. And since that's all he has, he, you know, he brought 300 generals and admirals to Washington a couple of weeks ago. He insulted them. He had an a numbnuts defense minister. Uh tell them that they were fat and and not up to stuff. I mean, it it's outrageous what he did. You know, he's so tonedeaf to do such a thing. Trump likewise. They're in trouble. That's why they did that crazy thing and then messed it up. You know, if you have too many of these, it's no longer the failure of this or that plan or the mistaken strategic. No, no. You have to put it together. What is happening here? And he's telling Mr. Netanyahu, look, um, you've got to change the position of Israel in the world. That's going to be very hard for is why would you ask that of a country, right? You're asking I mean the moon you can't why would you be in a position to do that and he's clearly pointing out whose job it is this impossible job. It's not it's them not me. I'm I'm I'm back. It's a little bit like what he's been telling the Europeans. You know, I'm not in this war in Ukraine the way I was. You can do it. You better do it, but I'm not going to help you do it anymore except peripherally. That's what he's telling everybody. It's because the United States cannot play the role it did. We are in this, pardon me, ass backwards way trying to tell the world and ourselves the empire is over and we have to figure out a whole new narrative, strategy, system of alliances, security framework, whatever language you want. It's over and we're in a new place and we can't militarize our way out of it. >> Well, there goes Richard again. He's being reasonable. Uh I don't think Israel is reasonable. I've known these people. They are fanatics. I' I've I've worked with Netanyahu's uh the head of Mo Mossad, his adviserss. There is no way they will change. They are not going to be reasonable with uh uh the Palestinians. They are committed to exterminating them. The American Christian uh are committed to uh to genocide. They uh if you you've seen in the whole decision to uh get rid of Mr. Kirk uh a month ago. He wanted to try to be a little more reasonable and reflect just exactly what Richard's been saying. He was killed. uh they they wouldn't expect they uh any dev any refusal to go wholehog with their program is meant in the same way that Republican congressmen here in America are treated as uh being expelled from the insider group if they don't go 100% with the extremism. I I I think we're dealing with an extremist uh ideology uh that with a religious fundamentalist conviction that is not amendable to listening to reason and uh Trump uh loves to make promises and to say uh here's a promise of peace. Trump has no intention whatsoever of living up to his promise. you just uh in today's news uh the Argentine peso is collapsing because Trump had promised 20 billion dollars to Malay and Argentina and uh he hasn't really done anything just as he'd prom made promises to uh Russia to try to at least stabilize uh diplomacy and uh in the last two days you've had Russian spokesman saying Trump has not followed through on a single promise he's making what you are seeing today is the uh euphoria of a promise that is going to be broken uh just as soon as Israel uh goes to war with Iran. And uh you can imagine the aftermath of that. Uh but I want to continue the logic that I'm saying. What do you do if you're an extremist? Uh you you have to uh you have to be totalitarian when it comes to knowledge. And uh Trump has declared war on the universities uh in the United States to treat student protesters opposing genocide uh to to expel them. and he's following uh the uh example of the Zionist uh university donors who said they're going to cut off all the funding to Harvard and other prestige universities who uh don't uh support a Zionist specifically anti-Palestinian uh position and uh I think the the trauma that the Zionist strategists have in mind that the protest protests against the Vietnam War by American students, the Kent State killings that killed the student protesters against the war. uh and that's what led President Johnson to resign in 1968 and said he wasn't going to run again because he couldn't go anywhere in the United States without taking escaping through the servants entrance of hotels where nobody would uh yell hey LGB LBJ how many kids did you kill today all of this is in the mind when you think you don't want the universities and the young people to uh to take a position of supporting peace because peace is assimilationism. Peace is saying that uh to want peace is to deny that uh both the joint US and uh Israeli control of Neareastern oil and the whole near near Middle East that uh is is an issue. Well, uh, last December you had, uh, US Senator Tom Cotton introduce a Senate bill that seeks to eliminate any federal use of the term West Bank and instead make substitute Judea and Samaria. And uh there's been uh in in Florida uh you've had uh the governor try to insist that the textbooks used in the Florida schools uh rewrite history to use this different uh terminology. Uh and the terminology is like sort of an identification as to who's uh what language you're going going to use. And uh the House of Representatives has a bill saying that the government is going to remove all references to the West Bank from US government discussions. The uh fighting with Gaza may continue. So Israeli settlers are now redoubling their uh their murder rampage against uh Jews on the West Bank. They're burning their olive trees. They're destroying their houses. They're they're bombing uh all of their uh any any houses uh to drive them out. Uh the war in the West Bank is now uh just as vicious as it was in uh in in Gaza. uh but there's no uh pro military uh protection of this and uh all it is symptomatic of the uh control the control of the news that this has not been uh discussed anywhere except on the internet. U Richard said at the beginning of the show that uh he doesn't have the information. We don't have uh access to the information. Richard, you and I have better information than President Trump has. We read the internet. We read the newspaper. We know what's happening. Trump is surrounded by uh neocon Zionists and has uh despite the fact that he has the public relations perspective that you describe, he has uh no understanding of the big uh the big picture that you and I and I think most people who follow Nema's channel have. That's what's so uh so uh striking in all of this, you know. Well, I think, you know, time will tell us uh whether you know how this is going to play out. You know, I could be wrong. I could be wrong that it it's shifting against Israel. Uh and that this is symptomatic of that. Uh but I would let me give you some more evidence that it might be shifting, right? uh the British political system is now in a state of collapse. I mean almost all points of view uh about Britain inside and outside Britain would agree the Labor Party has lost pretty much all of the momentum it got from winning the last uh election and putting Starmer in the position of prime minister. The Conservative Party that ran Britain for most of the last 30 years is in its final death throws. It may disappear. It is so weak at this point uh in its existence. The polls are against it. Its leadership is fighting each other. It it it it's really a shadow. And an extreme right-wing reform party is probably the best positioned right now. if there were to be an election. And it is a minority party with very little of a history and a very strange man at the head. But what's clear is that the program of getting rid of a very popular labor leader, Jeremy Corbin, which was accomplished by Mr. Starmer, the guy who's now in office, by pillaring Corbin, by blaming him for being insufficiently vigilant against anti-semitism where the evidence was support of Palestine. That's over. That's a game you can play once, but you can never play it twice. It's like the threat to commit suicide. You can play it really well once, but by the second time doesn't have the punch it did before. I want to remind everyone that a week ago there was a general strike in Italy. The whole country stopped because the whole country went out, stopped working in solidarity with the dock workers union there, which had refused to load or offload Israeli cargo from any ship docking in the ports of Italy. And a a few days before that you had mass movements across France on the 18th of September, on the 2nd of October, on the 10th of September. Those three dates and among all the flags of the millions who went into the streets of France were the Palestinian flags that were obvious everywhere. It's not just Mandani in New York. There is a global turning against. Look, it's remarkable that it took this long given how long the Israelis have done what they've done in Gaza and the West Bank and given you know the way they treated the Arabs who let's remember are half the population roughly of what of the country of Israel. So you have this split in the country and all of that. It's taken an god awful long time. But I do believe we now have signs. Britain has recognized Palestine as a state. So have most of the other European Ireland did it long ago, but Spain, Italy, uh Germany, I believe, is about to do it. France has done it. I mean, Israel's isolation is virtually total. You know, you even have conservatives running around the United States trying to explain to the American people that we're pretty soon going to have 10 billion people as the population of the earth. Half of them, five billion are Muslim. uh you've got a problem here and it's becoming impossible to pretend otherwise and all the money of the of the billionaires in Silicon Valley and all the expertise that IPAC has shown are not enough. You can't you can't go against a historical shift when its time is here. Michael may be right. It may not be here yet. I may be seeing things which even in their aggregate are not enough. But I haven't thought though before, but I think so now. Uh the communications I got over the last month from both France and Italy and also a little bit from Germany show a the Israeli issue which in Germany has been very important because of their collective guilt and all of that. It doesn't work anymore. the alternatives, which is the rightwing inheritor of the of the Nazi past, is able to get to be what it is now, which is the largest single party, eclipsing the the Christian Democrats in Germany for the first time. And their position is unmistakable. is not being held back as it used to be by the legacy of their of their Holocaust. For the for the Israelis, this this is all unspeakably bad news. You you you put your finger on the really important thing. What is the rest of the world going to do? And some of my friends that are still associated with the Democratic party have suggested imposing a litmus test pledge on political candidates not to accept any campaign contributions from a Apac or other Zionist organization. And if they accept such funding then the Democratic voters are called upon to reject them and if they win the primaries to refrain from voting for them. Uh even if this perpetuates the Republican Democ domination of Congress, you've got to get rid of the uh APECF funded uh candidates reflecting uh Zionist interests and beyond electoral politics, you you have the whole looming uh threat of the Supreme Court's uh s Citizens United ruling and that is a modern travesty saying that there's this is as destructive as the Dread Scott ruling that led to up to the Civil War. Uh the Congress is uh has to pass an act prohibiting private contributions to political campaigns beyond some uh circumscribed limit with penalties for bribery and corruption brought against such violators. That's the only way that you can cut off the money that is supporting this rotten congressional uh neocon pro-war oligarchic anti- labor uh position. And without such legislation, the United States and its political system are going to continue to be that of an oligarchy, not a democracy. And it'll be an oligarchy controlled by an extremist minority of wealthy financial institutions and the international neocons who are supported uh with them. So ultimately it's going to be up to the US and the same thing occur uh applies to Europe and other countries. It's up to the uh the the these other countries outside of Israel to lead the opposition to uh the genocide that's occurring and to the whole idea of uh ethnic nationalism and ethnic cleansing that you have in Ukraine against Russian speakers in uh in the Middle East by the American supported al-Qaeda and ISIS uh head choppers that is the head of it now and by Israel itself. in uh Gaza and the West Bank. And if you recognize that uh Israel's war against Gaza and Hama is against the the broadest principles of civilization uh of uh that have spent centuries developing the laws of war, the laws of international diplomacy, the laws of uh basically uh international relations. Then you you realize the travesty that's occurring in overturning this whole century long momentum of trying to establish basic civilized. >> It seems that we've lost Michael. >> Michael seems to have frozen. >> Yeah. >> Let let me let me pick up while we wait for him to come back. But let me let me pick up on the um >> Richard since you've mentioned the case of Germany. Here is the vote the poll that they had in Germany. Three out of five voters believe that Israel's action in Gaza can be called genocide. And this >> this mean this is meaningful as you've mentioned. Go ahead. But I want to I want to underscore the notion of of seeing as a symptom of a larger decline a rejection an active rejection of what used to be at least official norms of of acceptable behavior. I understand secretly those norms are violated by the secret services of many countries all the time. I I I understand that. I'm not questioning that. And that's a serious problem. But it is another step when you do that openly and publicly. And I think I want to point to something which might even be an argument against what I'm saying. I have watched and I am sure you have all seen it over the last month on at least four occasions that I'm aware of. The United States has decided to bomb and destroy boats in the Caribbean that are moving in the water near Venezuela. Each time we were told by the president that these boats were involved in the drug traffic and that persons on these boats were killed and thereby prevented from completing whatever they were doing with the drugs. Okay. So we killed 11 in one case, four in another, and I forget the number of people on the other two boats. All right. In this situation, the president who announced and authorized these acts is functioning as the police. He's functioning as the jury. He's functioning as the judge. And he's functioning as the executioner. In the United States, participation in drug traffic is not a capital crime. You don't get killed for that. If you're found guilty, you have to be have a chance to see the evidence presented against you. You have to have a lawyer. You have to be able to question and challenge the evidence. Then it goes to a jury. And only if the jury decides unanimously to find you guilty will you then be punished with the punishment 99% of the time being some sort of imprisonment. We don't kill those people, right? We kill in America. It's bad enough, but we kill people usually if they have killed somebody. And there is no evidence, not even offered by the president who showed no evidence of anything. But he didn't show any evidence that these people had killed anyone. This is extra and no one in the official positions of the United States government to my knowledge. I I'm no expert but I haven't heard any outcry after he did it the first time he did it a second, third and fourth time. This is I mean this is unbelievable. What is the This is the official murdering of people with no evidence required, no procedure, no due process, no presumption of innocence until proven guilty. Nothing. And the ultimate penalty penalty, execution. I mean, did am I the only one here finding this bizarre? Why would you do this? Forget whether it's correct or not that these people were involved in in drugs, I don't know. But whether or not they were, why would you do this? Why would it be important not to have your your your navy, which is down there, arrest these people? Okay, board them, check out, you know, bring them back and subject them to Why wouldn't you do that? Why would you kill them first? And here my is my answer again. I am seeing and I I would love to be argued that I'm wrong. I am seeing desperation. That's what I I I see people getting together in a room. They have to do something. They have that mentality. We we we we are losing something. We must act in a way that will hopefully gather support. And you know, going to war at least for a few weeks and months does that for you. It's awful then how it falls away after a few months. And that's been the American experience in Vietnam, in Afghanistan. Those wars were lost in part because the American people no longer supported them the way they had in the beginning. Same is true in Iraq, but for a short time you get a boost and you are now behaving. Look, all the laws of the world don't allow one country to kill people in the boats of another country and claim that they were involved in some transaction we don't like which we don't even punish by capital punishment. It is extraordinary behavior on the end of an extraordinary behaving regime. So I see a a level of desperation and I I bring it up because I think it should be factored in to how we look at all these other questions because that that hysteria that desperation is operative across the board. >> Yeah. It seems that Michael has some sort of problem with his internet connection. Richard, >> okay, maybe we should uh at the end. >> Thank you so much, Richard, for being with us today. Great pleasure as always. >> As always, and I look forward to talking with you again next week. >> See you. Bye-bye.