Hi everybody. Today Thursday January 8, 2026 and our dear friends with Richard Wolf and Michael are here with us. Welcome back Michael. >> Good to be here. Glad to be here. >> Let me start Mike you and what's happened in Venezuela. The Trump administration has decided to kidnap the Venezuelan president and he's right now in the United States. But after all, it doesn't seem that they they could change, you know, the whole government in Venezuela. What is your understanding of what happened considering Venezuela? >> Well, I guess we have to put it in the broadest possible perspective. Uh the Trump keeps citing the Monroe Doctrine saying that's our sphere of influence and the national security uh report that came out last month keeps saying well we're going to look at the world's uh in terms of spheres of influence. And Trump says uh Venezuela is part of Latin America. That's our sphere of influence. We have it. Uh what he didn't say is that uh we have our sphere of influence is actually the entire world. Our sphere of influence is also in the China Sea blocking uh Chinese uh relationships with Taiwan, interfering uh with its relationships with uh Japan and with the Philippines. Our sphere of influences in Ukraine on uh Russia's border. So uh China doesn't really have its own sphere of influence. uh nor does Russia, nor does any other country. Uh when he says Latin America is our sphere of influence, he says no other country has any sphere of influence anywhere else to uh threaten US policy. So the key is you know what is all this policy that he's applying to Venezuela? And obviously in Venezuela's case, it's all about oil because that's all that Venezuela really has right now. So I I'd like to emphasize to have most of this discussion and I've discussed it with Richard. Uh what are the uh the key elements the I have five elements of America's uh rules-based order. What are these rules that they keep talking about? And what Venezuela illustrates is that control of the world's oil is the most important uh element in America trying to control other countries because I as we've said last week and I think the week before if you can control the oil trade then you're able to uh disrupt other count's economy by sanctioning them. you can do to any other economy to China, Russia, India, uh Europe exactly what uh America did to Germany and the European Union when it destroyed the um Nordstream pipeline and when it told Germany, well, even though part of Nordstream 2 is still working, don't trade uh with Russia and we're imposing sanctions on trade. Well, this is the first point in which the US rules based order is the exact opposite of international law and the United Nations uh na rules that it put in place in 1945. Every country is supposed to have the sovereign right to do what it wants to trade who they wanted. And when the United States pressed for free trade and no controls over trade, it was focusing really on how do we uh break up Britain's uh empire sterling area and uh enable India and other colonies and Argentina and other countries that had built up reserves during World War II and were flushed with money. How do we uh make them uh free to trade with the United States instead of limiting their spending of these reserves in Britain [clears throat] as uh under the uh the exact rules? Well, uh now the United States is no longer running a trade surplus in uh in in the industrial products. It no longer has the uh industrial power and the economic overwhelming power that it had in 1945. Just the opposite. Uh it's become uh dependent on other countries, China, but also other countries to import provide its manufacturers. uh and it's uh become an international debtor which has le led other countries to try to uh be afraid to keep recycling all of their balance of payment surpluses into the dollar. So uh the the US basically is trying to say we have a unique privilege. We can control what other countries uh do with their oil, who they can export to, who they can import from, and we can say you can't export to such and such countries. You cannot export to um to China or to countries that don't follow American policies. Uh and you can only buy from uh oil producers in the American orbit. you cannot buy from uh Russia or Iran and now from Venezuela unless it's through us. So uh what Trump has done is saying uh henceforth all Venezuelan oil exports uh even if they're meant ultimately for China are going to be sent to the United States to Florida. They're go he's going to disembark the oil uh put it in the US reserve and then uh the the US on Venezuela's behalf will take its charge for what he said all of this uh probably a trillion dollars that we've been uh or will be spending uh on uh naval ships all around Venezuela. All of that's our cost of uh sort of helping Venezuela export soil in US terms. So we're going to take reimburse ourselves for the cost of going to war with Venezuela just as we did with Iraq. And uh after the uh in his first term, President Trump said, "Well, you know, we're going to grab Iraq's oil until we're completely reimbursed for uh all of the oil co the cost of invading Iraq to save it from Saddam Hussein." So >> Richard, [clears throat] it seems that we lost. >> What? What? I can't hear you. Yeah. Go back, Michael. >> What? Richard, >> can you hear me? >> Richard. >> Yes. >> Yes. >> Yeah. >> What? What happened? Nema. >> I don't know. For some moments, you just disappeared. >> Uh, okay. I suspect it's on your end. Well, let me go to the next point, then. I I don't know where I stopped. The the second element of this US control of the oil trade again as it applies to Venezuela is the oil trade has to be priced in dollars. Uh and oil has to be paid for in US dollars. All of this is the uh the principle that the United States imposed on the OPEC countries in 1974 uh when OPEC quadrupled the price of oil. Uh the United States said well the Treasury Department ultimate and the State Department under Kissinger said you can charge whatever you want for the oil. America doesn't have to own the oil resources of other countries in order to control the oil trade. All it has to do is control the marketing uh and arrangements and what's going to happen with the uh trade surpluses that oil exporters make. Well, the United States said, you know, you can of course uh you you can take control of the American and British and other oil companies in OPEC. Uh and you you can charge whatever you want, but there are two conditions that you have to have. And number one, you have to uh say price all of your oil in dollars and save all of the export proceeds that you have in US securities, mainly US Treasury securities, corporate bonds, uh and bank deposits. Well, that's what created the petro dollar market in 1970 1974 and five. The petrod dollar rule is that oil export earnings are to be lent to or invested in the United States. Uh and uh the the United States ends up the beneficiary of uh oil trade by OPEC. And that's exactly what it wants to do in Venezuela. uh that Trump has said that all of the uh payments for Venezuelan oil that are made uh by the United States in control of Venezuela's oil are of course going to be priced in dollars and uh they're all going to be saved in a a US account where if Venezuela does anything the United States doesn't like, it can grab the dollars just like uh it's told the bell, the Bank of England, you can grab Venezuela's old and confiscate it. Uh this this the uh means that Venezuela's oil earnings that are held on behalf of it in US banks uh are going to be a way of holding Venezuela's hostage. So these are three points so far. The fourth point is that uh how do you really maintain uh this this oil as the key to to energy? The uh US policy uh under Trump is that we're going to oppose all alternative energy sources to oil. That means we're opposing green energy. Uh all that's going to be discouraged. We're not going to join uh the Paris club uh of uh environmental protection. We're going to deny global warming. And not only are we going to prevent other countries from having an alternative to oil, but we're going to prevent the United States itself from having uh oil. The first thing on the first day when Trump was signing all of his uh uh presidential orders, he said, "We're going to cancel all of the subsidies that we've been making for the wind farms in the United States." Uh some are already in under construction. We're going to cancel the wind farms because uh wind is competing with uh oil and uh we want an oil-based economy here just as we want it all over the rest of the world. And we're opposing solar panels because how embarrassing it is. China is the main producer of the solar panels uh throughout throughout the world. And uh uh if you permit other countries to try to decarbonize their energy use, then they're going to do it by buying Chinese solar pan panels. And not only will that help China's balance of payments and trade, not the United States, but it will reduce the role of oil in the world economy. And if you reduce the world the role of oil in the world economy, you're taking away one of the major levers that American foreign policy has in controlling other countries. Because when Trump says, Trump actually is the most insecure president we've ever had. He says we have to do this because I'm I'm very insecure. If Venezuela can sell oil to other countries, that means that we've lost control of our ability to force other countries to follow the US rules of the order. And u there's one country that's even more threatening to America's security, he says, than Venezuela, and that's Greenland. He's he said a few days ago, Greenland is is a major threat. we uh to defend oursself, we have to uh invade, take over Greenland, maybe make it the 51st rate because there are all these Chinese and Russian ships in Greenland and that makes me feel very insecure. Well, on the one hand, America is telling Europe, you need to uh s uh succumb and surrender to all of the terms that we've made, the tariffs we've had because we're your great defender. We are the great defender protecting you against Russia's ability to invade you and uh rebuild the Soviet Union by marching right through Poland and Germany uh to Europe. But we're afraid of uh Greenland. We're afraid of Venezuela. The fact is we're really feeling threatened with everyone and that's really why we have this new cold war. So I guess you could say that the fifth uh characteristic uh character of American u rules-based order is that no laws uh or international law applies to limit the United States uh rules and policies and uh essentially that's uh why the uh you you've had not only Trump but his national uh security adviser Steven Miller saying well u America's law is might makes right and that's not very nice to say but now we can come right out and say it uh and uh with a a lack of hypocrisy at all saying well the United Nations does have these rules that are in its uh uh its general assembly is supposed to have the authority to uh stop us from doing things it doesn't like. Well, the general assembly criticized us when we took when we seized Manuel Noriega in Panama. Uh, and it's it's going to criticize us now. But you the UN doesn't have an army. Only we have an army. And uh, the fact is that even if the general assembly uh votes uh to criticize us and saying, "Well, what they're doing is against international law, Mr. Trump." Trump can saying, "Well, uh, what are you going to do about it?" First of all, we're going to veto in the Security Council uh, any action that you might take even if you did have an army. So, the fact is there's nothing you can do about it. And uh I could give you quotations uh from uh Stephen Miller but and Trump but they're they're all over the Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times and uh other papers saying that the whole principle on which international law is supposed to be based of national sovereignty. Each nation is control of its own policies. Uh not subordinate to America's uh statement of here's who you can and cannot trade with whether it's in oil or in other things. Here's the currency that you have to trade with US dollars not uh any bricks currencies uh of China or Russia or others. Uh all of this is a complete reversal of everything that was presented as western democratic values. All of that's ended. That's why what's happening in Venezuela is the perfect illustration of America's violation of every principle that was supposed to be international law, democracy, and really the progress of civilization. And that's why what Trump's doing is attack on the very principles that are supposed to be those of civilization in general. They're not those of Western civilization anymore. That's what's so ironic that the defenders of international law against this are China, Russia, and the countries that America are denouncing as adversaries. >> Richard, go ahead. Yeah, I'd like to uh broaden even beyond what what Michael has done uh as all of the world is trying to figure out how to understand what Mr. Trump's uh government is is after. Uh I'm going to begin with a historical parallel. Capitalism's uniqueness lies in many things uh but one of them is that the two world wars the worst wars in human history uh are credable as products of capitalism. Capitalism is a system in which every enterprise survives if it grows. There's no logic or rationale for the community as a whole in having every producer in it driven to expand because that's what survival requires. That is an irrational arrangement. A rational arrangement would involve deciding who is to grow, who is to shrink, why we would do that, and to adjust the patterns of development to the needs people understand and express. But we don't have a rational arrangement. We have an irrational one in which every capitalist who makes the decisions about investing back into their own business is driven to grow. You are rewarded if you do. You are punished if you do not on the stock market in terms of the banks you depend on and the workers you hope to come to your factory. Whatever this expansionary lunacy means, it's only a matter of time before the expansion of country A and its capitalists runs up against the expansion of country B and its c uh capitalists. And that expansion and those frictions eventually explode as they did in World War I and as they did again in World War II. And I think the United States is now on a death trip heading towards World War II. And for the same basic reason, its industries need to grow. But the problem is so do the industries of China. So do the industries everywhere else in the world. And that's not going to work out because they lack the the brains. They lack the perspective to sit down and work out a rational way to do this. So they irrationally each one does it in the lunacy of their isolated national situation. So of course Michael is right. There aren't this isn't a system of spheres of influence because the United States has never given up on its capitalistically driven dream of controlling the whole world. Of course, the the the sphere of influence says we can snatch the oil of Venezuela in Venezuela by kidnapping its leader. then we can at the literally the same time interfere in a ship doing business with Venezuela even though that ship is in the North Sea off of Europe. Where's the sphere of influence? What's the boundary today or yesterday? Mr. Trump announced that we're going to, I quote you now, do what Lindsey Graham proposes right away. That mere fact should be enough to tell you lunacy is coming. And there it was. The government of the United States, Mr. Trump in agreement, is going to, and I quote, punish the leaders of India, Brazil, China because they trade with Russia. Well, then where's the sphere of influence limited? It's only a sphere if it's different from other spheres. Otherwise, you're taking your irrationality and intruding it upon the language, which of course wouldn't surprise anyone who knows how lunacy works. But we're not done. We're not we're not even beginning to be done. Oil is a complicated uh commodity and energy which is what oil is used for is even more complicated. There are alternative uh uses to uh for other things than oil to generate energy. The whole world is experimenting with them. Michael is right. The United States has decided not to participate in what the whole world understands is a moment of rationality. Don't destroy the planet. You don't have to. You can use wind and ocean and sun and other way. The whole world is engaged in doing that. The United States has decided not to do it. The United States is holding back. Now, keep that in mind when I remind you of a very famous quotation from Karl Marx. Capitalism will die when it becomes not the agent of the development of the means and forces of production but turns instead into a fetter fe on economic development. what the United States is doing in going against the whole rational logic of non fossil fuels is its enactment of what Marx said would happen said has happened in the past. Capitalism comes into the world celebrating its own capacity to develop the means of production. In the case of capitalism, to shift from relying on animals to relying on motors, from relying on wood to relying on metal and the capacity to shape and to blend metals, which it did. It was advancing the technology. This is a system that is now the enemy Some of you know the the the name Leites. A famous group of people who in the late 18th and early 19th century were workers particularly in the textile industries who were displaced by the new machines, the spinning machines, the weaving machines. And in their upset at losing their jobs, these people at night went into the factories and destroyed the machines. They literally smashed them. And they've been made fun of because look how silly you are trying to hold back technology and it will win. Yeah. But the United States is now trying to hold back the electric car. the electric substitute for burning fuel. It's trying to stop the development of the means of production to narrowly constrain them into what is profitable for the few American industries that still exist. Wow. That's a condemnation that goes far beyond this industry, that industry, Venezuela or any other country. It's capitalism coming to the end. Its own irrationality impressing itself on its own people, no longer able to cover it over with verbiage. Yes, Mr. Miller and the other dim bulbs up there are able to say it's all a matter of strength. You know, after World War I, the attack of the whole world understood this was the worst war we had seen. And an effort was made called the League of Nations to get countries to get together not to do to one another what Mr. Trump just did to Venezuela. The Germans refused to abide by it because they had been left high and dry in the whole process. and the Japanese are saying. So they refused and the League of Nations dissolved. And then we had the the World War II. Even more horrible. And we made the effort again. This time we called it the United Nations rather than the League of Nations. And the whole point get together have the United States the Soviet Union and talking trying to work things out. Why? So that they wouldn't do to one another what Mr. Trump has now done. And if they did do it, to sort of hide it, to understand that they had to come up with some excuse, some something. And they were thin sometimes, no question. But they held on because of the wisdom of these efforts, given what war then meant, which is even less than what it will mean now. So to say, not only are we going to do it and do it a lot, but we're not going to cut. We don't care. We want to dismantle even the effort, the words, the language, none of it is going to remain. We're going to take it until they stop us. And you know the message to the world is already the United States is out of control for a rational citizen of this world. And now it'll take a time, no question. And I can't predict how long any better than anyone else can. But as countries are gathering and connecting to evade the tariff war, they will gather and connect to evade the kidnapping of their leaders and the effort to control key commodities like oil in an effort to hold on to a dead empire. This this I say with real confidence and I I don't I don't believe in predicting the future. I don't think I have that capacity any more than anyone else does. But it's already the logic. Last week a paper was re uh issued which I read produced I don't remember exactly I think by an economist for Goldman Sachs and another one from somewhere else and they did the most careful studies so far as to what the impact of the tariffs imposed by Mr. to Trump and taking into account all the exemptions, all the postponements, who paid for the tariff and the conclusive institution came to the following conclusion. The overwhelming majority of all monies raised by the tariffs were paid by Americans. It was just another t exporters did not lower their prices to escape the impact. They didn't. What exporters did who were hurt was find other customers so they didn't have to lower their prices. They did without the American economy. That is a very dangerous reality. It of course garnered no attention at all. If the Supreme Court issues a a ruling tomorrow is the scheduled release of it saying that imposing the tariffs was unconstitutional, which they may, he will then have to give that money back this president or at least that's the risk he took. Meanwhile, he wants to increase a defense budget. he announced yesterday by 50%. That's half a trillion dollars. There goes the budget right out the window. There goes the greatest indebted country going into even further mammoth debt. This is a desperate searching around for things to do to hold back the inevitable things to do to hold back the need to find a new way to liberate the technology we have. That's what this is. And it it is impossible I think to come to any other conclusion other than the world has to watch it which it's doing and figure out which it's doing how to put a control on this out of control government and society. And a last word, we have to face the fact, those of us that are Americans, that the people who run this country, and by that I mean the capitalist class, they are not stopping Mr. Trump. The rest of the world knows that they are not. It's a little bit like in the case of Israel. You can denounce Mr. Netanyahu, but the rest of the Israeli society is still behind him. If not domestically, then certainly in what is going on in Gaza and the West Bank. That has to be faced with all the scary connotations. And yet even there I notice more than ever voices in the corporate sector of the United States beginning to sound the alarm. Yale University has a school of management and the head of it, an extremely conservative uh corporate lover, is upset that there isn't more opposition. He's advi advising the corporations that come to Yale for seminars to get together to stop Trump. Otherwise, they will be picked off by Mr. Trump, who will give each little group of them something so that they support what he's trying to do, which has worked for him so far. But there too, the opposition is building. It is crucial to understand that nothing that happened in Venezuela changes the picture of a desperate empire trying to hold on to what it was in the face of all these movements. China continues to grow faster than the United States by about the same rate that it has for the last 30 years. The decline of American manufacturing relative to China, already far advanced, is getting worse. Russia and China together are a formidable opposition that they cannot get around anywhere near the imaginary that they exercise. And you know, Venezuela is a symbol. We're going to take over Latin America. Wow. Take over. You shoot up 40 or 50 people by by means of surreptitious betrayals by the locals there, or at least certain ones of them. All that will come out eventually. You've snatched a man and his wife. And what have you accomplished? What exactly have you accomplished? Now the people of Venezuela will have to face the divisions inside that society and fight out who emerges with what kind of situation. This is a footnote in the end of an empire. But if we do not mobilize both inside and outside, and let me remind you that the Trump administration has also designated this year as the year of getting rid of the domestic critics in this country. But if we don't do something, then the march to a third world war that comes out of the irrational competition of a capitalist system will play itself out again. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Richard, what you've been describing goes way way beyond what Markx was talking about uh in capitalism. uh you gave a wonderful quote from him saying uh what does uh capitalism have to offer? It uh has to offer improving the world's uh prosperity, improving its productive relations. That was the whole achievement of industrial capitalism. But uh that's not what's been occurring. Uh and it's not the capitalism that Markx was talking about. the industrial capitalism primarily. Uh the we've talked before on this show about how finance capitalism has uh replaced the dynamic of industrial capitalism. It's financialization and privatization of the US economy. It's the movement away from a a mixed public private economy evolving into socialism that Markx described is the uh basic dynamic of capitalism. He said yes uh capitalism is going to develop monopolies but uh nations are going to act in their own economic self-interest and realize that uh monopolies that are simply extracting rent uh charging whatever they can uh and exploiting society are increasing its cost of production, increasing its cost of living uh and thereby increasing the cost of labor to employers because uh the consumers, the wage earners have to spend so much more money on the monopolized products. So, uh, other countries are going to do just exactly what the United States did under the Republicans, Teddy Roosevelt and the others. They're going to say they're going to take uh natural monopolies such as communications, transportation, canals like the Panama Canal, uh railroads, uh public utilities, electric power, all of this is going to become uh this a public uh part of the public domain. And the role of these public monopolies of the government sector is to provide basic needs and services at subsidized prices not monopolized prices so as to make the economy lower cost and hence more competitive in industrial markets. That's not what what's occurring. We've talked about finance capitalism before. But uh what we're talk what has happened in Venezuela and with everything that you've been quite accurately describing about Trump uh is nothing to do with capitalism. It's the failure of capitalism. You could say you just point out where the where are the heads of American industry? Why aren't they stopping Trump from this craziness? Well, where are the heads of German industry in trying to uh prevent the cold warriors uh the uh the NATO, the Americans military NATO from uh essentially destroying German industry by imposing the trade sanctions against Russian oil, Russian gas uh that have led to the uh quadrupling of oil prices uh and gas prices, increasing the cost of uh powering factories, increasing the cost of uh families uh heating uh their homes and turning on the lights in their homes. All of this is military and uh this is what's so crazy. Markx did not anticipate that industrial capitalism was going to develop into an American fight to prevent industrial capitalism from other countries. Just the opposite. uh Markx gave a speech before the chartists in uh London saying actually he's all for uh the British colonialism in India because he said what's a capitalist country like u England going to do it's going to spread the capitalist mode of production to other countries and develop them all well that's not what capital industrial capitalism of uh uh Europe and America America did it all. They uh the the they did expand abroad. They did build railways and canals, but they took o they uh essentially uh lent money to foreign governments for clothes uh on the loans, took over control of foreign governments and made them the exact opposite of the industrial capitalism rules that uh governed classical economics that was the guide to industrial capitalism in Europe and America. They co they created client rontier oligarchies, client monopolists. They they made uh look at Latin America under uh American rule ever since the 19th century. Uh the banana republics, it was the American investors, the United Fruit that took over the land in Guatemala and led America to overthrow the uh Guatemalan government. uh it it's uh Americans uh under World Bank advice that uh forced other countries not to have food to feed themselves but to make plantation agriculture to fight against land reform. The whole fight of America has been against the whole dynamic of capital industrial capitalism uh that Markx uh described. And you uh what Trump is doing is essentially fighting all of the other countries that uh did not have the failure of America's financialized industrial capitalism. Uh that but we're going forward. uh China was following in effect uh of course of course it is a socialism with Chinese characteristics but this uh socialism was uh exactly what Markx believed would be the logical product of industrial capitalism and America stopped that and Trump's stopped that and if you look at what he's just done I think on January 6th uh he said Uh let me go into exactly what he said with Venezuela because this is this is really the key. He said Venezuela we're going to let it per let it export 30 to 50 million barrels of oil up to $2 billion. He didn't give a time frame for this. Uh and he said they this will continue indefinitely on a selective basis. uh he said quote proceeds will settle in USont controlled accounts as a quote globally recognized banks in other words city bank uh Chase Manhattan uh and then be dispersed to the US and Venezuelan populations we don't know the share is going to go to each uh at the uh discretion of the Trump administration and its campaign donors uh he he might have added. Well, you can look at this uh Trump has simply stated uh in his blog um that uh the real Donald Trump that Venezuela's oil quote will be sold at its market price and that money will be compelled by me as president of the United States of America. It will be taken by storage ships and brought directly to unloading docks in the United States from which some oil he said well some can go to China but of course China will have to pay the world price and uh the price will go into the bank account and uh we will uh share uh some of this uh oil export proceeds with Venezuela after taking the costs of us as conqueror uh of the to pay for the ships and the uh the costs of uh kidnapping the president of Venezuela [clears throat] and all of the other expenses. So basically the US uh idea is of of uh restructuring the world is something that uh no 19th century writer could have imagined as uh as occurring from we now know that the budget for the military-industrial complex is $1 trillion a year that was just passed by the Republicans. This one trillion is to be imposed on other countries as the cost of uh by the United States of protecting them from an imaginary threat by Russia to uh invade uh uh Western Europe and the imaginary threat of China conquering uh Taiwan, which American policy in law has already said, "Of course, we recognize the one China policy. Of course, Taiwan, just like Hong Kong, is really a part of China. We expect a a rejoining." The United States is trying to break up China, not only from Taiwan, uh, but China itself, from its Western provinces, from Mongolia. It's trying to break up Russia. All of what uh we we've been describing in the geopolitical discussion that we've been having on this site uh is an attack on uh industrial capitalism. And uh I think you put your finger on it when you said where are where are the American businessmen that are supposed to be members of the capitalist class? They've all been taken over out of fear of uh that Trump administration. What do we call this? Do we call it fascism? Do we call it Trumpism? Nobody's really come up for a word uh with a word for this distortion and transformation of the world's politics, the geopolitics, the economics. uh all of these changes are something entirely new and basically unanticipated. The whole idea of uh in of industrial capitalism moving forward after World War I and especially after World War II was to end colonization. and uh the uh there's no longer the political control of spheres of influence over countries like uh France and Germany and Britain especially and Belgium all with their colonies in Africa and the uh the Pacific. All of this uh was supposed to uh be superseded by the whole world becoming one in which industrial capitalism was supposed to uh produce profits. It would be reinvested in uh building more factories and employing more labor uh at rising productivity and rising technological uh capital investment. Well, what's happened is exactly the opposite of all this. The uh profits that companies made are not used uh to plow back into the sphere of production. They they're used to uh support stock prices to make wealth financially, not industrially to uh for stock buybacks. You buy your own stock to push up the price. Uh you pay higher dividends so that that will push up the price of stock. uh and uh the because the financial managers of corporations in America and Europe are paid on the basis of what do they do for the stock price this year. They they defer the long-term investment in research and development. They say, "Well, if we uh invest in research and development, we're not going to have the money to uh increase productivity and keep competitive." Well, just yesterday, Trump said he's going to stop pay uh paying having the military-industrial complex uh get business for Rathon. And he said, "What? you know, we're not going to give to Rathon permit Rathon uh to get any more contracts from United States government because it's fallen behind. We our military is way behind Russia, way behind uh China. It's technologically obsolete. And he said, why is this? Look at what Rathon's been doing. It's been uh using the profits that we've been made, the enormous profits of making $500 toilet seats, for instance. uh all these uh uh un uh un undocumented uh prices, whatever they want, but they've been using all of these profits to uh push up the price of Rathian stock, not to invest in research and development. So, they've fallen way behind. How on earth are we going to run the world and be the military threat under uh my new Trump law, might makes right? Well, if how can we have might makes right if we don't have the military technology if the whole of the America's military industrial complex Pentagon capitalism is really Pentagon finance capitalism and it's uh all ended up obsolete whereas China is doing what industrial capitalism was supposed to do. You use the profits to invest in research development uh higher to raise productivity, raise production and out compete your rivals. Uh all these other countries uh China, Russia have outco competed the United States militarily and they've done it by doing just what industrial capitalism according to Marx was supposed to do. So when Mark said that capitalism uh industrial capitalism is going to u fade out when it no longer has a productive role to play uh he also uh said at the very beginning of capital he's looking at the laws of motion of economies and uh uh if industrial capitalism of his day failed to succeed in uh in increasing the means of production, then it would evolve into something else or it would uh it would dry up in a country like the United States under Trump and under the Biden and under Clinton and under uh everything's everyone since the 1980s uh and other countries are going to take the lead. So what's happening I think fits into uh Marx's analysis of industrial capitalism but it's in the form of industrial socialism such as you have in China uh and such as and that is the real threat to America's security that other countries are capitalist other are are trying to reinvent the capitalist wheel of classical political economy and uh its idea you don't want to be a rontier society You don't want landlords and monopolists in the financial sector to get the gains. You want the industrial sector to get the gains. Well, that's what the whole uh what uh the world is evolving in. And that's what the United States is trying to stop. Trump and the American foreign policy is to prevent this developing be development because this development is preventing America's ability to control the world and its inability to control the world as a product both of other countries uh technological and economic progress and America's failure to participate in this economic progress. So that's what has made them in your words desperate. Let me only add if I can >> go ahead >> that ch what China did by having a hybrid economy half of it government half of it private is to say we'll get out of the capitalists what they're good at certain levels of investment certain levels of efficiency certain levels of coordination but we will avoid everything Michael just said we will avoid them becoming Rontier's monopolists and switching over their economies to what the United States did. Losing their manufacturing, losing their industrial and by the way, losing their efficiency. The most efficient production of electric vehicles is Chinese, not American. As are solar panels, as are a growing number of commodities. The Chinese have caught up and are now surpassing us. And that's also important to understand because that's the way the United States will not compete. It's too late for the United States. It's lost that opportunity by by demonizing the rationality of what the Chinese are trying to do, that hybrid, by demonizing it as socialism and communism and celebrating making everything private. They left the development in the hands of the privates, not understanding that they are only looking for profit. They don't care how that profit is worked out socially. That would be a rational idea of use the market and the capitalist for some things, don't use it for others because one fit one one size doesn't fit everybody. This is not fancy and difficult. But it was too much in the United States. The private mentality dominated and excluded the other in a great crusade called the Cold War. And now those chickens have come home to roost. The United States will fall further behind in 2026 just like it did in 2025, 2024, 2023 and every one of the last 25 years further behind China and all that that now represents. And also a second footnote. The first book I ever wrote called the economics of colonialism published by Yale University Press was a study of what the British did in the Kenya country in East Africa. And I went to East Africa and I spent months in the British Museum and the Colonial Office studying what they were doing there. And here's what I learned. from the 1895 when the British first took that area over or until the middle of the 20th century. There wasn't a day where they were not busy trying to make this colony quote pay for itself as they did in every colony. When Mr. Trump tells you about how he's going to do this with the oil and that's going to pay for, you know what he's telling you? We just colonized Venezuela and we're going to make the colony pay for the colonization of it by us. So my fellow Americans, don't worry. You won't have to pay money for this. You won't be taxed. That enormously expensive year of planning to snatch Mr. Maduro and his wife costing God knows how much money. Will that come out of the budget? Sure it will. Will that mean less money available for social programs? Of course it does. But that has to be layered over with a very strong effort to try to convince the mass of people that it won't cost them. That even though the people who really benefit, the oil companies already super rich who will become richer, they're not the only beneficiaries. And even if they are, you don't have to pay the cost. It was a lie. Throughout the British Empire, 99% of the time, Britain subsidized its own wealthy class by means of the empire. That was what it was for. You know how Kenya did it? Kenya did it because the British when they took over planted coffee and forced the black African population to work on whiteowned and operated coffee plantations producing what's called Arabica coffee which to this day is what the white world in the rest of the world drinks. That's how this was done. The cost to the people there astronomical far beyond anything they saw in the profits which were grabbed. When Michael says Mr. Trump wants to make sure the profits from oil, if they ever show up, will be given to those who need at least of course that's America. But the whole world sees this. And you know how it ended in Kenya? It ended in the 1950s when something called the Ma Mau uprising of the African workers led by a charismatic leader Jo Kenyatta put an end not just to the white plantations growing the coffee but ended the colonial status of Kenya and it became an independent country independent and politically and then ever since trying to figure out whether and how it can become independent in the real economic sense and that hasn't been worked out yet. >> Richard, I've got to leave. I have another appointment. >> Okay, let me stop there. So, >> okay. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael, for being with us today. Great pleasure as always. >> Thank you. >> Thank you. Is there a phrase?