Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, June 12, 2025 and our friend Richard Wolf and Michael Hudson are back with us. Welcome back, Richard. Mike, glad to be here. Let me start with what Tulsi Gabbard published yesterday which is so much important when it comes to her position in the Trump administration which we know she is the head of intelligence in the United States. Here is what she said. This isn't some madeup science fiction story. This is the reality of what's at stake. What we are facing now. Because as we stand here today, closer to the brink of nuclear annihilation than ever before, political elite and wararm mongers are carelessly fermenting fear and tensions between nuclear powers. Perhaps it's because they are confident that they will have access to nuclear shelters for themselves and for their families that regular people won't have access to. So, it's up to us, the people, to speak up and demand an end to this madness. We must reject this path to nuclear war and work toward a world where no one has to live in fear of a nuclear holocaust. Yeah, I'm going to start with you, Richard. When it comes to the situation with the foreign policy of the United States, we are in the Middle East. the situation is getting worse with the case of Ukraine the same. It doesn't seem that we have any sort of solution. And with China, it's getting worse as time goes by. But focusing on you, you mentioned before coming up, you said you mentioned the situation in in the Middle East is some sort of stalemate. Your take on that on what's going on there. Okay. Let me begin by responding if I may to uh Tulsi Gabbard making a speech if you're the American intelligence leader about the dangers of nuclear war, atomic warfare, is an amazing thing to come from the mouth of the leader of the one country on earth that ever used nuclear weapons on another country. It is the absence of an apology, the absence of shame, the absence of an willingness to face what you did and you want the rest of the world to step away from what nobody else did what you did. It's extraordinary. It's a level of selfd delusion that is a single most danger to produce nuclear war. That kind of self-d delusion. Anyway, to answer your question, the Middle East has been and is a now a stalemate. And here's what I mean. For much of the last century, the Middle East was the playground for foreign powers that invaded and took over in order to control oil. That was the issue. That was the goal. That was the program. Literally, a number of the countries there were created as countries. They weren't countries when all of this started. They were created later and the single dominant theme of their creation of the literal formation out of a desert population of a quote unquote nation was designed and orchestrated in Europe and in North America where these things were done. Now several events have made this story no longer valid. Number one is the rising up of the Arab and related peoples in that part of the world who have fought and overcome their colonial situations at least politically not quite economically but politically. That's one new factor. Number two, the overwhelming use of Israel by the West as its outpost, focusing everybody's attention on the ArabIsraeli contradiction and conflict, allowing the Western powers to continue to get from the Middle East what they needed so long as the Arab population was focused on Israel. which was nearly the symbolic forerunner of what was really going on. And then finally, the new situation, the decline of the Western Empire, the United States, and the rise especially of China, and secondarily now of Russia as China's ally. Russia being right up against the Middle East, bordering some of the countries there and close to them in many other historical ways. So now you have a stalemate. There's still enormous influence from the United States and Western Europe focused still, by the way, on oil more than anything else with a secondary support of Israel. But that is derivative about the oil anyway. and no one knows quite what to do. The Arabs are demanding a rising power and influence in the area which their numbers alone support and justify. It is after all their part of the world by any reasonable understanding of how geography and populations work. The West is powerful and holding on, but the West is holding on to what is ultimately a declining situation for them. And that's not even taking account of the fact that fossil fuels will be phased out eventually. Even though one has to be struck by the ability of the west to continue to hold on to as much importance for oil as their economic investment requires them to do. Okay, nothing can change here. Now this is the contradictions are too many and too complicated. And you can see that by the inability of the world to do anything confronted by what is the sharpest point of that contradiction which is the Israeli bombing of of the people of Gaza. Everyone in the world, the overwhelming majority have a position on that. And the position is anti-Israel and pro Palestinian. The votes in the United Nations show that I mean there are number of votes in which it's the entire world on one side and Israel and the United States on the other. I mean one could not have a more dramatic demonstration of a stalemate because the bombing goes on. Nothing is in a position to act definitively to stop it. So we have a war that's now going on and on and on and people are talking about removing an entire population. I mean it's extraordinary. And the second example is Iran. You can't do anything. The the Iranians have very powerful relationships developed now over many years with both China and and Russia. There's even a formal defense, mutual defense agreement between Russia and Iran. If you attack Iran, um, uh, where does that go? Israel would like to do it because Israel's only hope in the long run is to draw the United States in much more than it is willing to go in there and support them. Otherwise, at some point, and I'm not the only one who says this, the United States will take a a new look at the Israel and do to Israel what it has done elsewhere when it isn't anymore workable. Look at the noise being made over Ukraine. And the rest of Europe is supporting Ukraine despite America walking away. They're not that they don't feel that way about Israel. There'll be less opposition if the United States walks away from Israel. So these are incredible tensions, but they are contradictions in a sense that nobody dares move. And so when I hear, you know, the Israelis are considering invading Iran or bombing Iran or bombing Iran's nuclear facilities. I have heard that for the last 10 or 20 years. It's a periodic theater for the mass media to get all excited and meetings to be held and conferences and the theater uh getting the the personnel in the American embassy in Iraq to to send their children out of the country. Come on. You know what? What is this? What? Another we're gonna have another scare. Or of course, it is possible that people that are desperate enough in these stalemate situations will do something really stupid because they're desperate when people do stupid things. There is for example much information emerging that the internal political and legal difficulties of Mr. Netanyahu may be catching up to him. Will he then be provoked into doing something even he knows is stupid? Well, will the United States hide behind I don't know what and claim that it doesn't know about that the way the United States didn't know about the drone attacks on the Russian airplanes on their fields where they have to be by treaty out in the open and all of that. These are these are endless games. the there there's no more reality to this than listening after a night of drone and missile attacks to the Ukrainian government telling you how it shot down all of the missiles and the drones even while the press is showing the burning buildings or for that matter the Russians. I I can't verify either of them, but I can tell when what we're being told is quickly manufactured spin, as we call it in the US. That's what we're subject to. And it's very hard to get beyond that because so much information is withheld and so much information is phonied intentionally that we're left with a limit to what we can say. Go ahead, Michael. Well, about the military aspects, I can't say uh anything that your uh other guests uh that you have on your show, I haven't said uh much better because they're on the uh they're on the spot there. What I can talk about is the economic point of view and the political view from the United States. uh and oil is the common denominator uh of US diplomacy uh both for Iran and for Russia and it has been since World War II. uh a center point of US international strategy has been to control the world's oil supply because oil is the key to energy and energy is necessary for GDP for for employment and the United States uh aim is to say if we can control the world's oil supply we can cut do two things we can cut off uh oil being supplied to countries that don't follow US cold war policy and that will cause a depression in them and also oil because it's produced in the United States as well as foreign countries and because US companies uh along with England the seven sisters uh control most at that have long controlled most of the oil trade oil is the key to the financial uh standing of the west to the balance of payments um a huge inflow for the balance of payments that's been able to fund America's cold war spending. So uh you have oil setting all of this. Uh the the question is what happens when this involves war? uh in 1954 uh when uh England and America jointly overthrew the elected uh Iranian government of Mosed uh and installed uh the military dictatorship of the Sha that uh uh that was a kind of covert war that they can afford. uh the the problem is what do you have what do you do when actual military fighting uh is involved and I think the the over regarding Tulsi Gabri's uh comment the basic uh theme basic uh axiom of uh war is that atomic war is the only kind of fighting that a democracy they can afford. Uh it's the only weapon that America has that is actually effective. It's effective in blowing up the world and there will be retaliation and the US will be wiped out. Uh so it's a kind of self-defeating weapon, but uh no democracy any longer can uh recruit an army to invade a country and take over. Vietnam ended that for the United States. U and no European country is able to mount a military draft. Uh any government uh any democracy that tried to impose a military draft would uh immediately be voted out of power or somehow uh taken out of power. So you uh you can't uh actually uh mount your own army. uh you uh America was able to attack uh Iraq uh and it was able to attack Libya. Uh but these are uh wars against basically defenseless countries. Uh I I won't say uh on the level of Grenada, they were a bit more than that. But uh if we're talking about war with a major power, Russia uh or China or even Iran, uh America uh has no conventional warfare ability uh to destroy them uh or to beat them. That means that there's there is one alternative and that's to get a proxy army. And that's exactly what the United States has been doing uh as an alternative to the domestic draft and the military war. Uh its main uh fight has always been against Russia uh since the Soviet Union and uh its main proxy army uh has been uh Arab fanaticism. the Sunni Wahhabi uh al-Qaeda uh the that was America's alternative uh under Jimmy Carter to in Afghanistan uh to try to fight against the uh Russian uh alliance with Afghanistan. And Jimmy Carter said, "Well, at least the Arabs and uh uh Christians all worship God. Uh well, they worship in different ways." And uh so uh America founded al-Qaeda and set it up. Uh it then extended al-Qaeda into the near east into Iraq into Syria and has backed al-Qaeda with uh uh in Syria as you see now. and its other pro uh proxy army in the near east has been of course Israel and uh the agreement way back uh from the 1970s uh when I was working with the Hudson Institute was that Israel would act as America's proxy army uh and intelligence service and general uh political uh satellite to prevent any independent development of uh Neareastern countries uh going their own way uh and ha and acting independently of US policy. Uh and as you've seen I think for the last uh uh 20 years in uh under George uh W Bush uh in Iraq uh you you had al-Qaeda always working handin glove with the Israelis, never attacking them. there's been that difference for the first time now they're head-to-head in Syria and the question is uh there's a jockeying for position uh between the Israeli army in Syria moving eastward and uh the al-Qaeda group wanting to consolidate as much control as it has so that it can murder the Christians, murder the Shiites uh and go on its uh uh fanatic uh killing uh philosophy. So that's sort of the the political alignment there. As long as the but even so now as Richard has just said there's a political stalemate. Uh the America can't uh rely either on Israel or al-Qaeda to fight a fight Iran. There is a a stalemate there. And uh the question is how is this going to be uh resolved? And uh uh I I think it it helps to look at both at Iran and uh the situation in uh with uh the the fight of NATO against Russia in Ukraine to see what the the alignment is much more than uh just that of the Trump administration and the politicians. Uh on the one hand you have Trump intervening uh uh although Trump is the number one backer of Ukraine and uh started uh the Ukrainian uh escalation of war against Russia in his first term. He also wants to be the mediator and the honest broker uh acting completely dishonestly fully in alliance with uh Ukraine against Russia. So uh you have his uh pretending to be the good cop to uh the Ukraine's bad cop. But in addition to while Trump is and his administration have uh their position via Ukraine and Iran, you have Congress and you have Lindsey Graham from South Carolina. And no matter what uh agreement may be made between uh Trump and either Iran or Russia, you'll have Congress uh pushing its own agenda and uh it's uh virilently anti- uh Iran, pushing for war with Iran and pushing for uh escalation of sanctions and war with Russia. But then most important uh are is the third factor and that's the deep state, the CIA and its partner London's MI6 and uh they they've really been in charge of US foreign policy uh against Russia and Iran for the last 50 years. And they're both variantly anti-Russian. They have uh uh both uh together set up uh huge terrorist organizations, assassination groups, spying organization, intelligence gathering both in Iran and uh in Russia and uh they are pressing for uh uh for active war because they actually believe that the United States can win a war and they believe that America can win an atomic war. And I've sat in on discussions uh with policy makers and generals uh where they indeed have made that very claim. Uh and I think that's what Kelsey Gabbard was relating to when she said uh they think they can get into their bomb shelters. They really think that a preemptive strike uh would be able to uh dismantle Iran or uh Russia. And uh so the the what this shows the amazing patience that Iran and Russia have shown in not making their own preemptive defensive strike either against uh in the case of Iran against Israel and US uh military outposts in the Middle East or Russia uh against uh the NATO uh countries that are supplying uh Iran with weapons. against by Starmer in uh in England, Macron in France, and now merits in Germany. And the I I can say more later on. I'll let uh I'll let the discussion continue, but uh uh that that that's the alignment that we're dealing with. Richard. Yeah. I think that the stalemate will likely continue for all the reasons we've now kind of gone over and that it will be resolved by the ongoing evolution of the world economy which will be the more important shaper of what those people do than anything in in their bloiating denunciations of one another and and and let me give you an example. Yesterday, Xi Jinping, the head of the government in China, announced that the 50 the 53 countries of Africa will as of some immediate and future time uh be allowed to export to China with zero tariffs on any of them on any product at any time. All right, that's a milestone. Look at the meaning. the United States after it deals with China and after it deals with Russia and South Korea and Japan and the other bigger economies that concern it will turn its attention who knows when to Africa upon whom the United States has hit enormous tariffs I mean 30% 40% 50% on on small a African countries, you know, that you have to shake your head in disbelief. So, the United States is deeply threatening the economic viability of African countries by imposing enormous tariffs. At the same time that China removes all tariffs for the African for those who don't know China has been a more important trading partner for Africa for the last 15 years it's much more important for Africa to trade with China than it is for Africa to trade with the United States. And all that this shows is that relationship is getting stronger and bigger and more important both for China and for Africa. And the United States is simply becoming increasingly less relevant. No one should be surprised then when a few days earlier the American military general in charge of the Africa command makes comments suggesting that the Africa command of the American military is a failure. I don't know exactly what that word means but I get the message. The United States is and it's not because the United States military didn't do the right thing or the wrong thing. It's the development that I've just described say between Africa and China that erodess from underneath. No military question really needs to be asked. It's already answered by the fact that everything is realigning in the world in such a way as to resolve all kinds of matters uh by the flow of economic development regardless of of what is done politically or militarily. I don't want to overstate this that the military and the political are important and have their influence. But I think in this case, the stalemates that we talk about militarily and politically will likely be resolved by an economic development that is no stalemate at all. And you could see that in the in the London meetings over the weekend between the United States and China in which there's lots of spinning, but a bottom line looks like the United States had to give in order to get something and didn't come out with any kind of uh new world order that is any different from the one in which the United States is losing. And when when when Michael said quite correctly that the Vietnam War taught the United States the lesson of how dangerous it would be for the US to try to mobilize hundreds of thousands of of troops from American people. Let's remember the war was incredibly expensive. They made the mistake. The war came to an end because of the opposition at home and the United States lost the war. The Communist Party of Vietnam was the enemy and the Communist Party of Vietnam runs that society politically now. They won. We lost. And we discovered that if you're not careful, you'll lose the war at home, whether or not you're doing better or worse on the battlefield over there. Th this was very very powerful and has affected our military and is behind half of what goes on that they will never tell you about because admitting even the admission that they lost the war in Vietnam is difficult for them not for anyone else in the world but for them. Well, when you take into account the economic view, uh Richard is quite right. Uh it's uh it's not a stalemate. Uh it's not a stalemate in Africa. Partly we've just seen the United States abolish all of its foreign aid uh to Africa. That had been actually a great help in fighting disease and fighting famine. Uh America's essentially told Africa no more help. Uh but I think the uh the best illustration I can think of is what's happening uh in Russia's war with nuh NATO. Uh there's been a lot of uh the the guests that you've had on your show, Nema, have uh talked about, you know, why is uh Putin going so slow? What is the pace of war? And um it's it's a war of attrition. uh it's not trying to grab uh land. Putin is trying to uh save uh Russian lives. But there's another uh a non-military reason why Putin is going so slow, very gradually, very defensively uh making sure that he uh minimizes the number of Russian soldiers killed while maximizing uh those of Ukraine. And that's because while this war is going on, Europe is being torn apart politically. As Richard and I have spoken on on your show, uh the when the United States uh has uh re recruited uh foreign armies, it's rec recruited foreign economies. And just as it's willing to fight to the last Ukrainian, it's willing to fight uh to the last German uh industrial uh uh employment, it's convinced uh it's uh helped install leaders like the ones we mentioned earlier like Merits in Germany that is uh uh fully in favor of the war despite what the German population uh wants. Uh you have essentially NATO has hijacked the European Union by taking over the unelected uh Vonda and Kaya the Estonian Kaya Kalis uh to steer the EU uh in a diametrically opposite direction from what every uh v uh test of voters is shown. The voters want peace, not war. They want low energy prices, not high energy prices as a result of the sanctions against Russia. They want uh the government to spend money on social programs, especially to subsidize the cost of heating their homes and getting electricity now that their uh energy prices have uh quadrupled. Uh there the dissatisfaction against uh Star's Labor Party in England. uh and the Christian Democrats in Germany and Macron's party in in France. U the all of the these parties are being threatened from the nationalist parties uh on the right from uh England uh to France to uh uh the German aft AFD and nationalist parties that are also coming to power. You just had that occur in Poland. uh you had that occur in Romania uh with the uh Europe saying we are no longer a democracy uh if uh uh is as Mark Twain said if voting really mattered they wouldn't let you do it. Uh and uh when it began to threaten to matter in um Romania they said well we're not going to let you do it. we're going to appoint uh uh who get who gets to win just as the United States appointed a Venezuelan uh uh leader to uh uh be the recipient of uh uh Venezuela's uh foreign exchia. Uh essentially we're having a breakdown of democracy that of course is leading to a nationalist reaction. Uh I'm very disappointed that this nationalist reaction is all on the right, not on the left. But uh the important thing is that it is a reaction uh against the uh uh the existing pro-NATO, pro- US, proc cold war interests. And that gives uh the longer that President Putin takes to very thoroughly follow uh his intentions that he's been explaining in detail again and again for the last three years. Uh the the more Europe is going to be pulled apart while the Europe German and the European economies shrink and the Russian economy accelerates. Uh certainly this is this is becoming uh more and more obvious and the strains are arising. You've already seen the economic and political strains in Israel uh as a result of the uh the war in Gaza and the any attempt to extend this war to u Iran from everything that your military experts have been saying on your show Nema would be that Iran can uh essentially uh destroy uh the destroy most most of Israel and uh many American camp uh uh camps, military installations in the near east, which is why the United States has just pulled back the families and non-essential uh soldiers in all of these military installations. So, it looks like certainly uh either the State Department is trying to pull a stunt of saying, "We're really threatening to go to war. We're pulling back all the an unessential people. Do you really want war, uh Iran?" either this is just a kind of threat which is another weapon that the United States has but it's become another weapon of uh what Mao called a paper tiger and I think Iran, Russia uh and China is coming to think of America now as a paper tiger because the whole military strategy of the United States has uh proved to be inferior to that of the countries it's attacking. In in Ukraine, it was based on tanks. Well, tanks worked in World War II. Tanks worked um in Iraq uh and the near east uh against pretty defenseless armies. But, uh tanks don't work any longer on the battlefield against another actual landed army because you have the drone warfare. the drones uh can defend themselves against tanks at a much lower price. Uh the air force doesn't seem to work. Uh if there's any attack on Iran, it has to be by American airplanes able to carry the bombs capable of fighting Iran. And uh Iran apparently has the uh uh Russian and its own uh air defense that uh uh makes the United States hesitant to uh uh to trust to uh the Israeli and US air force uh in all of this. That's what makes it seemingly a standoff. Uh but then you have the wild card uh as uh Richard said uh of somebody acting really stupidly meaning ideologically or uh just uh as uh on their own uh valition and whether it's someone as unstable as Donald Trump and his uh inexperienced uh cabinet or whether it's the deep state that says yes, we're probably going to lose But we're not going to lose if we go and have a war with Russia and Iran now as badly as we'll lose in five years as we get weaker and weaker compared to their growing strength. So that's that's the real problem that we're dealing with. the US military strategists and political strategists uh are uh to the extent that they're realistic, they're realizing that the US military advantage that uh they have based all of their foreign policy on since World War II is now gone. And how do you uh try to maintain your unipolar economic policy uh when your military policies gone, when the costs of recruiting a uh a client army such as NATO uh or Israel or those of Arab al-Qaeda uh and the the Wahhabis? Uh h how are you going to uh do that when you're you're steadily losing uh relative power to the countries that you have disguised as your adversaries. They're in a defensive position. America is uh in the offensive position. That's uh really the issue. And uh the uh the other trigger can be of course at what point will the defensive position say we see an airplane taking off from the west? Uh maybe it's coming to us. Let's shoot it down. That's probably going to be the next big crisis. Whether it's uh over the fight against Iran or the fight against uh Russia, it's all it's 50/50. Richard, before coming to you, here is what NATO secretary general said about the conflict with Russia. agree with Keev that to end this war is going to require additional long range strikes into Russia to take out its industrial capacity. Well, to to end this war, we need uh Putin to come to the negotiating table uh and not with this historian who is now popping up in Istanbul twice and again telling us about the history of Russia and Ukraine from whatever the 12th century. I don't know what it was and constantly restating what they stated already in 2022. You need a Russia which is serious wants to negotiate and end the war. Uh and to get there uh it all I think starts of course with keeping Ukraine strong in the fight. Yeah. We had by the way we had a an article in the Financial Times. It somehow tries to picture the Ukrainian army the way that the the latest attack on nuclear bombers of Russia were done by AI. That's they don't need manpower because they know Ukraine has the problem of manpower in in in the fight against Russia. They're trying to change the rhetoric. They're trying to keep Ukraine in this fight that they know is destroying Ukraine. Go ahead, Richard. Yeah, I think there's again the answer lies in being aware of the history. The very effort of that person on the clip to put away the historian. That's not interesting except as a reflection of the need not to think historically about these questions because you don't like where that thinking takes you. So, let me do it and give you another way of understanding it. Ever since 1945, Europeans have been in awe of the United States. After all, the United States was where in an in the end they borrowed the money to fight World War I. The United States was the country that could produce military ships and planes and bombs in World War II. That what were what the Europeans relied on more and more as the war progressed. The irony, the historical irony is that the United States was the industrial superpower of the first half of the 20th century and was therefore in a position to become the dominant empire because the Europeans fought a war which extro exhausted them, destroyed them and created literally the market for American industry before the war by the nature of economics and after the war by the nature of the war because as the Marshall plan showed the United States was in a position to lend them the money to use to buy the American industrial output without which there wouldn't have been a reconstruction or it would have taken much much longer. Okay, so here's the reality. In Europe after 1945 and up to this minute, every active politician learned, if he or she didn't know it before, that the way to go up the career ladder in the governments of Europe was to be known to befriend the United States, to be pro-American, to be eager to accommodate the superpower. And every politician who didn't get that memorandum was pushed aside often by the United States who made it crystal clear, we don't like this one. We don't want that one. We're not happy with this one. That's how it worked. When you read now about the behavior of uh the woman American diplomat whose name I forgot who who put Mr. Zalinski into power that was not unusual that an American diplomat an ambassador or you're talking about Victoria Nulan. That's right. Victoria Nulan. Thank you. She's not unusual. She's not distinctive. There's nothing interesting or exceptional about her, including dismissing the Europeans who cared about them. That's what she's famous for. But she only said out loud what everyone knew. Why am I telling you this? Because the leaders of Europe today, Starmer, Macron, Merz, that's that's who they are. They have built their careers. They have spent the last 30, 40, 50 years building a career around being the psy for the United States. That's who they know. That's where their self-image comes from. They're not going to turn against the United States because they've gotten to the position they have precisely because they were the most acceptable to the United States. No one should be surprised by this. Of course, that's where they go. And if there is a moment when an unusual American leader like Trump questions what's going on that it's going to take some time before others who question like Trump displace this generation of European leaders who are simply carrying out what they develop. It's it reminds me of a famous cartoon that I used to see in the movies and there's an image of a duck running off the edge of a cliff and it it it gets to the edge and it keeps on running for another few minutes before it looks down and realizes there's no cliff anymore and then it drops like a stone. You are going to see in Europe over the next months and years the steady slow disappearance of the US pandering European political elite and they're going to be replaced by people who see the world differently and who reject a future because it's not looking very good for them. And then Mr. Mertz is the ultimate because Mr. Mertz not only made his political career being a pathy but he worked for Blackstone or Black Rockck one of the two leading investment houses capitalist as the head of their German office. Okay, you can't be more American than Mr. Mertz. So he is he's the poster boy and Macron isn't different and Starmer isn't different. This is we're watching the last of the Moheakans here, but it's not a tribe in America. It's a tribe in Europe. And and getting together around Ukraine is like old home days. It's these people once again being in their element, fighting the evil Russians on behalf of the Americans, standing up for democracy and in toning all of the catechism of that kind of politics. And like the duck running off the edge, they can't stand looking down because if they do, they will see that the United States, to whom they are showing their good obedience, isn't there anymore, has turned and left and is looking at them as if they were the paths that they always were. There is no greater hatred than that of the master who no longer leads the slave and needs to get rid of that slave and has to come up with an excuse and not understand how much the slave did for them. It it this is pathological politics that we are watching. I think Russia summariz uh Richard has summarized the European dynamic political dynamic quite well. Uh I'm beginning to wonder how much uh Trump really is trying to set out a new position uh visav the cold war. After all, it was uh he who broke the original uh agreement with Iran. He who escalated uh the situation against the war uh against Russia in Ukraine. Uh there's uh one theory that I think some uh of the guests on Nema's show have suggested that uh what Trump is trying to do and what the American deep state's trying to do uh is uh even though they know they cannot win the war, even though they accept the principle that yes, it's a stalemate, at least they can use this stalemate to continue to drain Russia, drain Russia, drain Russia as long as America's is not paying the expense. Europe is paying the expense. Uh Israel is paying the expense. The Arab countries are paying the expense. Uh as long as they can do that, but uh the the whole idea is to somehow be enough of a an annoyance uh to Russia, which is the highest level of victory they can have, an annoyance uh an external cost to say to Russia, well, you know, we can stop all of this. uh all uh you can come over to our side uh if you will agree to join us in sanctioning your natural enemy China. I think that is the fantasy that uh the dream state has. I'm beginning to worry from Trump's policy. It's as if Trump is following uh all of this uh deep state fantasy that yes uh if we can just uh somehow uh pressure Russia enough uh the fantasy was that number one uh Russia's growth uh would decline the ruble would decline in price not rise that uh the voters in Russia would turn against Putin's United Russia party not support it uh as populations do when they're support their leader when their country is at war. I they their whole fantasy was based on even though not winning they could somehow uh persuade uh they could uh hurt Russia enough that it would come over to their side to avoid the hurt and being willing to ultimately commit suicide, let the United States move into Ukraine, carve up Russia and destroy Russia and then try to do the same in Russ uh against China. That's the cold war fantasy that the deep state has. uh and that uh apparates trying to uh gain enough support from the crazies uh in in Congress uh from Schumer on the Democratic side to uh South Carolina uh uh in the Senate on the other side. I think that that's the real dynamic that we're fa they're facing and it's a crazy dynamic. Uh and it's it's bound to fail and uh as Richard just said, the master gets very angry when it see itself losing. Yeah. Let me add that the missing element, Michael is right. The missing element here is is having a significant part of your population, whether it be of your political leaders or of the society as a whole, who asks the the obvious, which is if you keep doing what you're doing to Russia, if it doesn't seem to be draining them, turning them in on each other, upsetting the society, then maybe what you're facing is what you should have imagined in the first place. That sometimes when you attack another country, you solidify it and unify it and mobilize it to be your enemy and then you've made the mistake of losing because you have strengthened your own enemy. You have to you have to ask that question. It looks like Russia has gotten exactly that, Mr. Putin gets enormous popular support from polling, including polling done by people that are not friendly to him. So we we're not stuck with only one kind of evidence. And look, Mr. Trump's attack on the world by imposing tariffs on everybody makes the rest of the world very much able, no matter how sleazy their politicians might be, they're all in a position now to do something that has more than a grain of truth to blame whatever the economic problems are of their country on the United States. You have positioned yourself as the big bad hurt. You're the one who's hurting their exports, their imports, their balance of payments, their gold holdings, whatever the hell it is. You can blame there's a logical linked of that to the tariffs and all of that. Look, there's a new leader of the US Chamber of Commerce just announced. Okay, the new leader does what the old leader did. We like Trump. Oh yes, tax cuts are wonderful. But you know this stuff about tariffs, awful. They don't want these tariffs. And why is that important? Because the business community of America will go along with everything Michael just said about the American government as long as it doesn't look like they're going to lose because at that point it don't it's not attractive anymore. you, Mr. Trump, better be very, very careful. Running after the fantasy of the State Department, as he described it, as Michael just described it, is all well and good until it isn't. And when it doesn't work, when it's beginning to cost, then the questions will be raised. My goodness. Just as now the questions will be raised not by people who are against uh what his policies on immigrants, they don't care. They're not against deporting. They don't care. But if you can't function in downtown Los Angeles because of the policy, then they care. That they do not want. That's disruptive to business, to com commerce, to tourism. They don't want any of that. And that that's a problem. And that's a problem you should have understood. You could be worsening by the very policies that you're pursuing. There is no evidence that the Russians are facing a situation that would require them to do what the fantasy Michael just described would have them do. Throw in the towel. Give up the fight. Not at all. There nothing. There no evidence at all. The right-wing is correct in this country that the Russians continue to fight the war. that absolutely nothing you have done to them has led them to come to the table. The only really interesting thing is if putting tanks where you hadn't put them, putting F-16s where you hadn't put them, whether raising the sanctions, by the way, the latest European sanction package is called package number 18. That's because 17 previous ones did not work. That's why you have more of the but there's an old joke. You keep doing the same thing hoping for a different result suggests that you're not sane anymore. We are at a very dangerous point. There ain't much left in the way of slack. And by the time they figure it out, which is another six months, most military experts think the war in Ukraine will be over within six months because the Russians will have finished the job. And it's we we are in a very bizarre moment of this whole story. Well, the interesting thing, Richard, is that you and I can say these things on Nema's show uh and even the Chamber of Commerce uh can begin to uh uh show realism. But if you and I work for the CIA or the State Department, uh they would say you're we're not team players. We're not on the team. we would be forced out just like Ray McGovern describes his having been forced out by uh the CIA that uh our voices are not heard within the US uh deep state or within the government uh or within uh the leaders of the Democratic and the Republican party. Uh that's that's the problem. Uh they're they they have thoroughly insulated themselves from reality. I guess you could say that's the big picture wrapping all of what we've been discussing. Yep. That's, you know, all I can tell you is every now and then, despite my having the label Marxist put on me, I am invited by a hedge fund in downtown Manhattan. And when I get get there and then they I I say always my first question, why are you having someone like me talk to you? And their answer, if they're smart, and those are the ones that hire me to do it, they answer, "Well, we know what the other side thinks. We see it all day, every day. We need to understand what critics think. That's what part of our job is." Of course, we invite people like you because, quote, "It would be stupid not to." Exactly. Thank you so much, Richard, Michael, for being with us today. Great pleasure as always. Thank you.