Hi everybody. Today's Wednesday, November 26, 2025 and our dear friend Michael Hodson is here with us. Welcome back, Michael. >> It's good to be back. Please subscribe and hit the like button and to help us reaching more people. And on you can see the Michael Hudson's website below his name in michael-Hudson.com. You can go there and follow Michael >> Hudson hyphen. >> Yeah. Okay. >> Okay. >> Michael, let me start with the 29point plan on the part of the United States. They have proposed a 29. It seems that they have reduced it after the meeting Rubio had in Geneva with Europeans and Ukrainians. They have reduced it as Donald Trump mentioned we thought that it would be n 19 points and but Donald Trump today said that it's going to be 22 points but after all looking at the document what is your take and what's going on with the document? The important thing to realize is it's not a peace proposal. It's not a plan at all. It's a bold attempt to shape the terms in which the public views the entire Ukrainian coup d'eta at the Maidan in February 2014. uh followed by the whole uh Ukrainian attack on the Russian speaking population and the last uh almost three years of war. It's a fight to shape public opinion and it's in that sense a brilliant propaganda attack. Uh, President Putin and Foreign Minister Lavrov have given speech after speech explaining the whole history, explaining how the Russians intend to end the war when they win and they uh create a new government free of the Nazis, free of the Russia haters and uh disarm Ukraine and prevent it from drawing NATO. What the NATO and the Americans have done is instead of just giving a different speech and saying, "Okay, here's your narrative. Here's ours. They've encapsulated the uh their answer and their counterargument and their counter narrative in the form of a point bypoint listing by listing uh is if it's a proposed articles of agreement and of course these articles will never be agreed upon uh there's no way in which either Russia or NATO Europe and the United States not to mention Zalinsk's government in Ukraine can accept them. So the the purpose is not to get any agreement at all. It's to make people think in terms of how do we view what's happening? What's the war all about? Who's responsible for it? And uh there uh these points have been crafted by propagandists to sort of win the hearts and minds of the people in uh in support of the Maidan coupe. And uh the aim has been sort of leak to the press going all the way back to reverse the way of how World War II ended. The uh what Europe wants to do is say we want to refight the end end of World War II. Uh and already in 1944, Churchill was saying, you know, let's uh as soon as the war is over, let's attack the Soviet Union. Europe said, well, let's go back to that point. Um 1944, okay, that's 80 years ago. Let let's see whether we can uh refight at that point. Now we can attack the uh attract attack Russia. That's really what all of the B it's about. And it's a outrageous trick. It's been carefully thought out and propagandized. Uh and so the peace proposal is not intended to bring peace. It's just a propaganda uh charade at pretending to negotiate peace. And it's really a propaganda effort. uh and uh in a word the aim is to uh essentially obfiscate what is really happening by uh by the way foreign minister Lavrov said yesterday uh at a French uh news conference that Europe's quote elites opted for war and have staked their entire political careers on the slogan of inflicting what they call a strategic defeat on Russia. unquote. Well, that's failed. So, they NATO realizes it's lost the war. It doesn't have the arms to fight. You've seen the Russian advance accelerating day after day. So, NATO says, "Oh, okay. We'll lose the war. How do we win the peace?" And that's going to be how is history and current voters uh going to look at what's been happening? What is all of this about? And if you look at the US press, the New York Times and the uh Washington Post and the British Press, it's which side of the fight is analogous to the Nazis and Hitler? Uh you uh in the New York Times yesterday you have uh Freriedman uh talking about uh well uh how can Trump appease uh appease Hitler? Trump is a Putin's puppet. Uh he's uh these agreements are really Russia's uh uh demands. Well, of course they're not Russia's demands before. You can read the Russian demand and what Putin and Lavrov have said. So I think uh we can uh I if this were really an agreement to discuss where do we go from here and how do we think about solving this fighting in Ukraine the article one should be were there any war crimes committed that's what it's all about and a basic uh issue is well by if if they were by whom and against whom? And uh who are the who are the victims and uh what were these crimes? Well, Russia has already announced that when it uh conquers Ukraine and installs a non-Nazi government, it's going to hold a modern Nuremberg trial that uh it's it's going to uh convict parties that have committed war crime. That is what terrifies the uh NATO leaders and not to mention the uh kleptocrats in in Zalinsk's regime that have enriched themselves and been embezzling the loans from uh Europe, the United States, and especially the International Monetary Fund to buy uh properties offshore and Bitcoin and the things that kleptocrats do to uh hide or conceal the money they've taken? Well, for the Russians, it's vitally important to establish the historical record because that's the key to what is going to be the body of international law following from from all of this. Well, uh, again and again, President Putin and Lavrov have said, "We thought that the Nuremberg trials had establish the international law of war crimes. We've been attacked. Russia is not the attacker. The Maidan was the attacker. The Ukrainian attack on the Russian-speaking population, the civilian population uh was a a war crime b breaking the rules of war. We came in to protect the Russian speakers. the uh the populations of Ukraine of Luhansk and Donetsk have voted to become part of Russia which they were in practice all the time during the Soviet Union when there wasn't any real uh separate Ukrainian uh nation and uh they u the the Russians are basing their actions and their intentions on international law. To do this, they have to have a Nermberg trial, a war crime trial to reiterate, well, what uh what is the appropriate international law to deal with a situation such uh as we've been fighting for more than two years uh in Ukraine. And uh the the West says, well uh there it was Russia that's uh the attacker. Russia's committed uh the war crime. And that's a travesty of uh what's happening. But it's the aim of the uh US and NATO narrative sort of to turn the war in in into a new cold war propaganda weapon uh against Russia aimed at turning the world against Russia and supporting the uh Western Europe. though in practical terms, it's to protect the Ukrainians and neo-Nazis and the European uh backers to whitewash all the corruption that's been occurring doing this. And a major aim of the Ukrainian Nazis has been to avoid punishment. They want to leave Ukraine with the money that they've uh embezzled and stored away and uh go to their British mansions and Mediterranean castles. So the US NATO uh proposal uh calls for blanket amnesty and if there indeed uh were a war crime then uh there shouldn't be an amnesty for uh for everyone. Uh the if a criminal breaks the law, then the criminal must be arrested and put away. Not merely to punish uh them for what they've done in the past, but to protect the present uh population from having them continue to commit uh crimes. Well, that committing crimes is exactly what uh the NATO West wants to do against Russia, against China, against Venezuela, against Iran, uh and against uh any country that is resisting the US dominated world order. So, all of this uh uh jockeying for uh how how do we determine the terms of peace? Is it all we're just going to forget everything? Uh are we going to blame Russia or are we going to blame the United States and NATO? All of this is what's at stake uh in all of this. Well, I I can elaborate. The original proposal called for Ukraine to investigate corruption. The Wall Street Journal a few days ago reported that uh the Ukrainians insisted on changing the language to say that all countries will receive quote full amnesty for their actions during the war. Well, the actions are not only the war crimes uh staging false flags like the BHA uh stage, but for the the crimes of embezzlement. uh the World Bank, the Europeans, all have agreed that NATO is the most corrupt country in the northern hemisphere and it has been ever since 1991. Ever since >> You mean you mean Ukraine is the most corrupt? >> Yes. What did I say? >> You said NATO on the >> I'm sorry. Well, Ukraine is the most corrupt, although it's it corruption has been with the full uh participation and uh support of Europe. And I I would imagine that any trial is going to be well uh is going to involve uh the actions of uh Micron and Meritz and Starmer uh and uh the British in breaking up the agreement that uh the Ukrainians and Russians had made uh to end the war uh a few all the way back in 2022. uh the uh the agreements that uh were all broken and turned out to be want a ceasefire just to rearm Ukraine uh with uh more NATO arms to go on fighting against Russia. That's something that Russia is never going to fall for again. So the whole idea of a ceasefire is if that's what these proposals are about, there never was a chance a possibility of that. And so if that was never a realistic possibility, why are they doing it? It doesn't have anything to do with creating a actual peace. As I said, it's a it's a way to shape the categories of how people think about the this whole conflict between NATO and uh Russia. the whole expansion of NATO since u it had promised uh the Americans had promised NATO would not expand uh if Russia ended uh its military occupation of central Europe and agreed to dissolve uh the uh Soviet Union. All uh all of that's already happened and I don't think Russia has any intention of trying to trust the West again. So uh the reality is that any real peace agreement logically has to be created after the fighting stops not before it stops and especially not when one side is defeating the other uh overwhelmingly uh trying to freeze a conflict when Russia is overwhelmingly w winning is trying to uh solve the Ukrainian problem by just abol uh essentiallying uh just uh making the loser set the terms of the peace. Europe uh the NATO and the United States have lost the war that they started uh in Ukraine, hoping that the war would drain Russia's economy, would create an economic crisis, would persuade Russian voters that we need a regime change. Uh we've got to replace Putin for having started this war. Uh and put in uh a a new group. uh and the NATO and US idea of a new group is the same neoliberal kleptocrats that they put in in the 1990s. Uh privatize Russia, ideally break it into parts, the whole strategy uh against uh Russia and that's just just a fantasy. So how can they at least how can they at least try to convince the population that this fantasy is a realistic probability and even a moral probability. So the it their solution is to say well the big picture who are the counterparts to World War II's Nazis in this and we're seeing a replay of the ending of World War II. Uh and since Russia's organizing the peace, it's in a position to hold these what I called the new Nuremberg trials. Uh and the NATO aim is uh to make people take seriously the idea that Putin is a modern Neville Chamberlain making peace with the Nazis. this this comparison of u uh uh I'm sorry that uh not Putin to make Donald Trump look like a Neville uh a Neville Cham Chamberlain Chamberlain just surrendering to Russia. Uh that's what uh Freriedman had written in the New York Times. It's what the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and the uh network television in the United States keep saying. We're back in uh the uh the start what started all of World War II when Chamberlain uh did not protest against Russia's uh defend uh moving into Czechoslovakia to defend the German population there. Well, uh, if, uh, trying to say that Trump is a Chamberlain means, uh, you're you have the leaders of the Republicans in Congress, Mitch McConnell especially, says there's no way in which the US Congress can possibly agree to the even the proposal that uh, the Trump and the his staff have put on the table. So they've all Congress has already announced this uh any agreement is going to be a no-go. The uh Ukrainians have said we absolutely will not seed any territory to Russia even though Russia's conquered it, even though we have no army to defend it. Uh we're not go we're not going to agree with that. Well, that the defeated party does not get the right to determine the terms of peace and uh who won and who lost. That's what war is about. As Clausovit said, it's a continuation of policy by other means, by military means. And uh Russia has been obliged to use uh an enormous expenditure and troops to achieve this military policy of ending the NATO expansion towards trying to destroy the uh the Russian economy and hurt it in any way it can uh especially by cutting off its trade with uh Europe in oil and gas and other uh things uh to uh seize Russia's savings uh that it had kept in the west and euro clear its foreign exchange reserves uh that it was using. So uh the that that's the first issue. The second article of dis up for discussion uh should not be uh put in terms of blaming one party or another. It should be who owes reparations to whom and how are reparations going to be paid. Well, trying to frame the narrative as if Russ uh it the current uh text says Russia owes reparations to Ukraine. But it's Ukraine that should pay uh reparations and Europe NATO should pay reparations to Russia for an initiating the war, for breaking the rules of war, for destroying enormous amounts of civilian property in the Russianspeaking uh portions of what was Ukraine and what is now Russia. And uh this is the cover story for the US uh and Congress backing the uh NATO euroclear seizure of more than€200 billion euros even more in dollars of uh Russian assets. They say make these make these assets a loan to Ukraine. Well, Ukraine's already broke. It's unable to pay the IMF uh loans. The IMF loans in fact were made illegally against the basic principles of the uh IMF saying uh the International Monetary Fund will not make loans to a country at war or to support a belligerent. Uh the IMF said this is not war. You know, this is uh we're defending ourselves. The war is Russia, not Ukraine. So the pretense that somehow Ukraine is liable, the hope is going to be that when Russia carves out its portions of uh those Ukrainians that want to be part of Russia and vote uh to become part of Russia. That the whole idea is to destabilize the next decade of legal argument saying Russia owes money to the West. Well, if Russia would have thought of not giving speeches, but let us put a 28point plan in, it would have said, how much does a West own Russia? What's going to be the cost? There is no question that Russia is going to spend more than 200 billion uh euros and dollars the equivalent in rebuilding all of the real estate that you've seen destroyed in the fighting that's gone on so far which is entirely on Russianspeaking uh land. Uh the way that the uh the Trump administration shaped the agreement was well all right uh we'll give the uh hundred we'll give uh a hundred million of this uh half of the money to Donald Trump's group so American companies can come in and they can rebuild Ukraine and make enormous profits. Uh Russia has no intention of uh letting American real estate companies rip off profits and emulate the uh Zalinsky kleptocrats and just embezzling uh the money for themselves and building the kind of shoddy building that uh Trump is known for and the shoddy Trump tower whose uh architects uh tell me they it's he cut costs everywhere and it's just junk. the Russians build much uh stronger uh buildings to last and at less expense than uh Trump's uh real estate ripoffs that he made his career uh on building. So all of this uh is uh an attempt to somehow the phrasing of the peace agreement is designed to justify uh Trump's and the Americans and the Western Europeans attempt simply to grab uh uh what was Russia's foreign exchange reserves for themselves uh and prevent Russia from having the resources uh to uh spend the balance of payment strain that it's going to take to buy the raw materials, the equipment to rebuild uh the buildings with plumbing, uh all of the imported goods, the facilities that you need to make new uh apartment houses, houses, the vast amount of reconstruction that Russia is going to have to spend and has promised to spend in Luhans uh and the other uh donuts and the other territories that it uh takes as it moves west to again to those populations that want to remain part of Russia, leaving uh the Ukrainian West that does not want to be part of Russia uh isolated, demilitarized, denazified, and disarmed not to ever again become a proxy battlefield for NATO uh led by the United States uh and the neocons in their fight against uh Russia. It wants to prevent that permanently uh not simply to have a short-term uh ripoff that is being proposed by the United States. I'm amazed that the the Russians have not been more uh vocalized in calling a spade a spade in all of this. Uh and I guess you may have other uh points of the agreement that you you'd want to uh bring up. And if if you go over point by point, I'll be glad to uh uh answer them. But again, to me, the key is Russia's 200 billion in reserves is the subject of this false narrative of the premise that Russia's the attacker, not NATO, and that Russia's attacked civilians, not uh Ukraine has attacked civilians. Russia was very careful to focus on military targets uh and that extended to uh energy uh companies to electrical systems. Uh Russia had proposed a a mutual agreement between uh it and NATO Ukraine not to bomb each other's energy. And uh President uh Trump said, "No, no, we have to bomb Russia's oil refineries because we want to block Russia's ability to export oil. We want to create an oil crisis so that the United States can use oil as uh the key controller of American foreign policy. This is what you and I have discussed for the last few months on your show." So, of course, uh uh Trump said, "No, no, Ukraine. uh don't agree not to bomb energy uh uh systems. So, uh, Russia realizes that it's energy that has been powering the NATO arms factories, that's been powering the Ukrainian, uh, war machine, and that it's, uh, basic military tactic is indeed to, uh, to, uh, focus on destroying this uh, military ability to fight. milit and energy is as much the key to military conquest as it is to gross national product. Uh energy is what makes the the factories go is what heats uh uh apartments. Uh and it's uh made life unlivable for much of western Ukraine. And that's uh that was the choice of Trump's foreign policy. So these are the two uh shaping narrative structures of the propaganda effort that's been put in place. Do you have any questions you want to follow on to fill out this big picture? Michael, one of the crucial points in the 29 29 points is that the size of Ukrainian military, the size of Ukrainian army, which was supposed to be in the document is they're talking about 600,000. Then Europeans change it to 800,000. And right now it seems that there is no limitation for that. Who's going to pay for this army? you know it's a huge army if they go in that direction >> because this army should be you know should be supported by someone you know other countries Europeans together with the United States which literally means that NATO is going to arm this ar this Ukrainian army again and again to fight Russians the same the same attitude do you think that Russia would you know would accept that >> this is uh this is the opposite of demilitarizing the enemy. Remember the end of World War II, the uh the Morganthau plan in the United States was to say uh make Germany never industrial again. Make it an agricultural country, make it a theme park, but it won't be an industrial country. So that was uh Morganthal's plan and that was turned down uh by the United States. But the idea was uh for Germany and also for Japan. Japan and Germany were to demilitarize and never be able to rearm because they were incorraable aggressors. Um and uh that that is the principle the exactly the same principle that uh Russia is trying to do. The NATO says we have to triple the size of what the Ukrainian army was when we begin this war and we have to leave the Nazis in control. There won't be any war crimes trial. We have to leave the Ukrainian government. It may not be Zinsky. It'll be uh one of the Bandaraa followers. It will be the Nazileled army so that if we failed so far, we can come again. And this time we're really going to hit you with long-term missiles and uh we're still going to bring down the government until the Russian population says uh it's worth anything to surrender to the West and let them take over. We can't fight anymore. This is the evil fantasy that is being promoted. And of course uh Russia is going to say we are the victors. We get to disarm the government. We get to put in place a post-war constitution of the restructured Ukrainian uh whatever is left of Ukraine. So that will not have a standing army. It will not have uh western weapons. And if the west uh western countries, if NATO or the United States uh provides weapons to Russia, President Putin has already said if a Russian missile or a Russian weapon uh hurts the Russians, we will retaliate not simply against Ukraine. That's only the uh the battlefield. We'll re retaliate against the country that has supplied Ukraine with the weapons. Well, Donald Trump has said uh quite realistically, look, there's no way Ukraine's going to win. It's a black hole. We are not going to give weapons to Ukraine. It doesn't pay. We want to fight China. This is a race war. It's the uh Anglo-Saxon West against uh against the global majority. Uh and uh China is the key, our long-term uh enemy. We want to do to China what uh we've tried to do to Russia and failed. So, we're not going to spend any money on arms uh on Russia because we've depleted all of our our arms and NATO's depleted its arms. No, it doesn't have anymore. We've got to prepare for the the uh final conflict of civilization, the civilization fight against uh the by by the west waged uh against the 85% global majority. That's Trump's uh position. So Trump is not going to provide American arms to Ukraine. It'll be the European countries and it will be these countries against which Russia will retaliate and uh destroy. not only their arms factories if the arms are made there but the uh the political and military capitals and ports and power supply uh itself. uh the uh the European NATO leaders having agreed to fight to the last Ukrainian are now saying we're going to fight to the last European uh in order uh in an attempt to somehow hurt Russia a little bit. So European history essentially is going to end uh if this uh plan is put into operation. Uh Russia has made that very clear. Uh it it says there there must be a better solution. Let's just have nothing to do with Western Europe. Let it go its way. It can be it can join the United States in some kind of political maybe alliance maybe become uh uh France can become the 52nd state, Germany the 53rd state, you know, after Canada and Mexico. uh right down the line u it it doesn't matter but Russia wants to dis separate itself from the west and turn east the west it's the wants to move eastward via Russia towards its own fight against China that is the long military dynamic and it's a crazy dynamic and it's crazy because there's no chance that the West has is of winning. Its arms don't work. The uh the American uh attack him missiles that were just fired at Russia were all shot down by the Russian defenses and then the Russian retaliated by a missile that uh killed the uh the troops that were sending the missiles uh away. uh I I don't know how you can get a clearer example of this is in a microcosm uh what would happen if there are further NATO uh attempts to uh attack uh Russia but uh you can you can see that they they don't have the arms they don't have the money for the arms and yet the Russian leaders Macron Starmers uh the Dutch leaders uh and the French general uh last week said uh France should be willing to sacrifice its youth of the future to fight Russia. We need an army to uh go into Ukraine towards Russia and invade it. Uh your your children are going to die. It's all worth it because we hate Russia, don't you? Well, how are they going to get the population ever to say, "Okay, we'll send our kids to war and they can fight to the last uh French uh infantry man, just like the uh uh Ukrainians are fighting to the last Ukrainian. Of course, uh we will agree that this is a moral fight uh against Russia. I don't see any way of convincing the French population of doing that. So far, you've had all of the yellow vest protests against the Macron government. What more can they do? What do you do when a government is fighting a war in Ukraine that the uh against Russia that the populations of uh Germany, France, the rest of the European countries do not support. They've their only outlet has been to support the nationalistic parties. such as uh the alternative for Deutseland, the uh Maloney in Italy and similar uh parties uh in England and and abroad. Uh that's uh that's not very effective in stopping this whole military plan of attack and the whole rearmament and the whole uh resumption of the new cold war which really is trying to refight the end of World War II. That's really what it's all about. Well, Russia's going to be the winner. the winner gets to set the terms and uh uh the u the NATO will lose but it can say well if we can generate in the public mind enough resentment against uh the Russian victory against the Russian denazification against the Russian demilitarization of Ukraine then uh we can create fan this the ci simmering embers of resentment into a new anti-Russian uh uh mentality. It's all about the narrative once again. That's uh that's what they're trying to do in all of this. And that's why they keep uh calling uh Trump uh Neville Chamberlain and Putin uh as the Hitler uh and turning Trump into Putin's puppet. Uh and it turns history inside out. And uh with it the whole idea of right and wrong and good and evil as described by the whole spirit of civilization for the last uh few hundred years of drawing up laws of warfare, laws to prevent armies from attacking civilians. Uh false flag operations. uh the whole uh behavior of and breakdown of the system of international law that's occurred over the last few decades really since uh 1990 quite a few year decades now. Uh all of this is is a breakdown. That's what we're dealing with. The breakdown of the West and the attempt by Russia, China, and uh Eurasia to create its own laws of civilization on how they would define civilization. And these laws are pretty universal. Uh and they'll pick up what the West ideals used to be, but which the West has abandoned now. Michael, how do you see the ability of Europe? Because Ursula Ursela Vanderion was talking about Ukraine must be part of Europe. Ukraine in today's condition that they have politically, economically, militarily. Is Europe capable or able to let Ukraine in? Uh the question is what will Ukraine be? Uh if uh Europe lets Ukraine in, is there going to be free migration uh within Ukraine? uh you're going to have an uh the Ukrainian males who are able to uh bribe their way or otherwise escape from uh the suicidal service in the army have already gone into Poland and uh central Europe uh and into Germany. Uh from what I read in the newspapers, they've made themselves fairly unpopular there by being very demanding, saying you have to support us. were vict were victims. Can Europe afford this whole migration crisis? Well, the whole spirit of the nationalist parties uh and of the voters is uh very much like the United States. It's anti-immigration. They're saying Western Europe for the Western Europeans or at least they're saying France for the Frenchmen, Germany for the Germans, uh Britain for the British. uh but not uh the for these countries uh to support uh first of all the uh influx of populations from the Middle East uh where the United States has uh destroyed uh from North Africa uh from the Islamic countries and now from the Ukrainians uh the uh in order to fund the war you've had uh Mer Chancellor Mertz in Germany uh say we've got to cut back uh social spending. We've got to end the u subsidies that we have given to German families so that they can afford the higher gas and oil prices to heat their homes and to cook and to cook and to drive their cars uh that we've been giving uh when we cut off the trade with Russia. We cannot afford that if we are going to spend our money on creating arms to give or sell or otherwise provide Ukraine with. Well, what do you think the Germans are going to say? Well, it's okay. We're willing to freeze in the dark and eat cold cereal instead of cooking uh as long as we're hurting Russia. Is they do they can they really be convinced to hate Russia that much? The neocons find this yeah believable because they hate Russia that much. They're not willing to fight uh Russia. And the banderites, the neo-Nazis in Ukraine are not the armies primarily that are fighting. The Azov battalion and others tend to stay in the back and send the UK the Ukrainian farm boys to fight, not the not the Nazis themselves. they're shooting the their own soldiers in the back if their soldiers seek to retreat instead of moving forward and simply being killed by the Russian drones. So, you're having an uh an interess Ukrainian war by the Nazis against the non-Nazi Ukrainians. uh and you're going to have this kind of counterpart uh all throughout the European countries between the neocon governments uh representing NATO. The EU union represents NATO, not the elected voters uh and the voters in the European uh countries. All of that is breaking up the European Union itself. And that's going to be one of the results of this war. It will not be up to Russia to uh do what it's doing in Ukraine and rewrite the European constitution and restructure the European economies uh like it's it it intends to do in Ukraine. But uh you can see that in this fight over how to depict the culmination of the Russian military victory and restructuring of Ukraine and the loss of the war by NATO, by the United States, uh and the loss of its whole plans to destabilize Russia to to deplete its arm supply in order to try to make Russia deplete its arm supply which has not occurred the failure of all of its unrealistic forecasts and uh uh this is what what's at stake. Can it maintain the fictitious view of reality that led to all of this failure in the first place ever since the 2014 Maidan coup d'eta? uh that's what uh is the the big picture of destabilization that's occurring and at a certain point will at what point will the European countries say we've been suckered into fighting uh on behalf of NATO which is really the US milit uh war department as Trump has renamed it uh really in uh serving American neocon foreign policy and maybe we should have a European policy and the aim of our policy should be to improve the productivity and living standards and self-reliance of our European countries themselves uh for our self-interest not the neocon and uh the Trumpian American uh self-interest that has led to uh the surrender of Vondan to Trump's tariff uh rules a few months ago. Uh they're they're going to put European interests before foreign interests and that's going to mean uh at some point the loss of Europe to the United States. But u this has been discussed in by uh Putin in some of his press conferences and he said I think realistically you know it's going to take about 30 years for there really to be a restoration of trust and trade and investment mutually between Western Europe uh and Russia. For the time being, we're turning eastward with countries that uh we whose values we share. And uh this ending of the Ukraine war like the beginning of the Ukraine war has been all about values. And uh I think Levon had a wonderful uh statement a few days ago uh in the meeting with Barus uh that Russia has once a year uh he said if we talk about what was uh and what they want to restore meaning uh NATO uh these are all exhausted Euroatlantic models. NATO and the OCE are Euroatlantic structures. The European Union is uh ceased long ceased to be a European forum where the interests of Europeans are represented. It's become an appendage to NATO and what they call fighting for their values is fighting for what turns out to be Nazi values. Uh that's says it all in in a nutshell. uh he said again uh yesterday uh Lavrov said in a French interview uh that the the whole drama began with the West's attempt to have NATO absorb Ukraine create a military threat to Russia right on our borders and in spite uh and in breach of all the promises given to the Soviet Union and contrary to all the understandings concluded then with the Russian Federation is part of the OCE uh framework on the indivisible nature of security and uh the fact that no organization no country in Europe will seek to strengthen its security at the expense of others. It was approved at the highest level NATO acted in exactly the opposite way. So that's that's the Russian position that's going to shape how it restructures the domestic uh legal system and political system of Ukraine uh and uh the uh the value system in which it's uh it's doing this. So if you read what they've said, you realize the total disconnect between the so-called peace proposal propaganda uh effort and uh what Russia intends to do. Russia has been sort of slow to raise the ante and say this isn't simply about what uh military side is going to win. It's a fight over what are the values of civilization and uh Lavrov has said that uh Western Europe no longer has the values that shaped the enlightenment and shaped European idealism at a point when uh Europe achieved world political and economic ascendancy uh in the 19th and 20th centuries. Michael, I know that before coming up to this live, we were talking about it that, you know, about the Bloomberg's, you know, leak of Steve Wkov private call with Kremlin a Yuri Ushakov. What are they trying to do? Looking at the social media, the way that they're attacking Steve Wkov, they're calling KGB agent is Rash's puppet, Putin's puppet. He's doing he's an agent in the Trump administration. What's going on with the case of Wkov? It seems that establishment is attacking him and these people are getting in line with the establishment. >> Well, you mentioned the establishment. It's obvious that the phone calls uh and the emails that uh Wititov was h handling were all copied by the National Security uh agency. just uh essentially they're doing to Vitokoff what they did to uh when uh Donald Trump in his first administration tried to appoint uh the general that was uh going to clean up the CIA and uh clean out uh the uh uh the bad actors. Uh the the NSA leaked it to the FBI saying, "Oh, look at what the general said." They pretty much falsified uh the charges against him. I'm blocking out the general's name, but you must remember who he is. Any rate, they're trying to do the same with Vitkov. They're trying to say Vitokov by saying uh here is the reality that we recognize uh when he was talking to Dmitri uh and other Russians. Uh, >> Michael, you mean that general that was because of the Russia gate, they say that he's connected with Russia and General Fillian? >> Yes. General Flynn. Yes. They the one thing that they the deep state wanted to do was to prevent General Flynn from being appointed to clean out the CIA, to clean out the neocons. That's what uh Trump wanted to do. and uh they uh framed him up and they made him uh they they got Trump's uh awful vice president to say and his uh idiot son-in-law uh to say, "No, you've got to get rid of General Flynn. The FBI doesn't like him." Well, of course, the FBI and the deep state doesn't like him because he wanted to clean out the neocons. Uh and uh the uh Trump was gullible enough to trust his idiot uh son-in-law and the uh uh the vice president that he uh that was urging him and he listened to the neocons who he wanted to get rid of for the advice don't have anyone strong enough to get rid of us uh in power. uh he was suckered uh and I think he decided not to do that again and that's why he's focused in his second term on appointing politically loyal um uh cabinet members and army members and NSC members and state department members. Uh the problem is that appointing political loyalists uh doesn't uh they're they're not all that savvy as to how to really conduct foreign relations and foreign policy or even military policy. So uh that's the trade-off that is sort of tearing his uh second ter term apart. Well, they're trying to say uh Woodco by saying that Russia is winning. Whit is also Putin's puppet. Well, any attempt at reality is defined as pro-Russian because reality is the Russians have defeated Ukraine. They are marching towards victory that they will probably conclude at the end of uh next spring at the latest in Ukraine. They will uh get rid of the Nazi government. They will replace it with a new government. They will write a new constitution. uh all of that uh uh obvious military victory is a realistic explo uh expectation and yet that's called pro-Russian. Well, if reality is pro-Russian, then I uh that means that uh NATO and America is the sphere of unreality. And the only way that you can ever get unreality to somehow dominate the electoral political process is by uh shaping a narrative in a way that distorts reality uh that distorts the uh uh the reality that recognizes Russia's military victory in Ukraine and by the same token that recognizes the futility of ever sending millions of Ukrainians to die or to immigrate or uh to uh suffer to fight to the last Ukrainian. Uh what will the Ukrainian population think when the war is over? The voters, not the neo-Nazi leaders, uh and the kleptocrats, what will they think to say, "How did we ever get our children and our relatives killed in this feudal fight that we've lost?" uh and had no chance of winning because we were outgunned, outmanned. Uh and it was uh all of this was just to somehow uh weaken Russia, not to help us, not uh what interest did we have in fighting against the Russian language, in burning the library books that are written in Russia from in Russian from blaming from uh banning the Russian speakers, from banning Russian music uh and all of that. Uh last time I was in Latia, I remember uh we uh were invited to a concert and it was uh Dimmitri Shastikovich's opera Lady McBth of Mazinsk. Well, here's Latvia. This is in the many years ago when I was there u performing Russia Russian operas. All that now is swept away by the anti-Russian Baltic uh uh feeling by the the banning the uh Russian speaking population from voting and really having a voice in the electoral pro electoral process. So that's uh that's what all all of this is about. uh and they're when they're saying that uh Vitkov is uh pro-Russian and that what he is saying that Russia's winning is pro-Russian that it's as if that's a bad word instead of saying well Bitco is recognizing economic reality thank God that we have Donald Trump appointing him that is willing to face the reality that is Trump has said again and again Ukraine is losing and if Ukraine doesn't agree to end the war now on whatever terms it can, it's going to be in an even worse position labor later. Well, Trump is right. >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Thank you so much, Michael, for being with us today. It was great to talk and in details what's going on in terms of the Trump's 29point peace plan and >> what's happening behind the scene. Yeah, great pleasure, Michael. >> Thank you very much. I'm so glad we had this discussion. >> Yeah, it was amazing. >> Thank you.