Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, April 24th, 2025 and our friends Richard Wolf and Michael Hudson are back with us. Welcome back. Good to be here. Good to be here. Starting with what's going on between the United States and China. Here is what Donald Trump said. Started with China. China. Are you going to play hard ball with them? Are you going to mention CO? I'm not I'm not going to say No, I'm not going to mention CO. I'm not going to say, "Oh, I'm going to play hard ball with China. I'm going to play hard ball with you, President Xi." No. No. We're going to be very nice. They're going to be very nice. And we'll see what happens. But ultimately, they have to make a deal because otherwise they're not going to be able to deal in the United States. And we want them involved. But they have to and other countries have to make a deal. And if they don't make a deal, we'll set the deal because we're we're the ones that set the deal. Scott and uh Howard and myself and others, we're going to be setting the deal and uh it'll be a fair deal for everybody and it'll be uh I think it's a process that's going to go pretty quickly. China was taking us for a ride and just not going to have it's not going to happen. We're going to be very good to China, have a great relationship with President Xi, but uh they would make billions and billions and billions of dollars a year, and they would build their military out of the United States and what they made. So, that won't happen. But they're going to do very well, and I think they're going to be happy, and I think we're going to live together very happily and ideally work together. So, I think it's going to work out very well. And China's foreign ministry has officially denied reports from Washington suggesting that active consultation or a potential agreement of tariffs are currently underway. Michael, let's get started with you. Has Trump caused irreversible change changes in world trade and investment? Well, it turn it turns out that this whole idea of imposing radical tariffs uh is all about the cold war with China. Uh Trump says he has three months to negotiate with other countries making a deal. I'll agree not to disrupt your trade and investment and you know cause uh cause you uh bankruptcies. If you will agree not to trade with China and in fact to impose sanctions uh on trade with China, uh you'll do to China what uh we asked Europe to do to Russia. you will forego the prospects of increasing trade with the most rapidly growing economies of China, Russia, and Asia. Uh if uh if you uh agree to that, then we'll roll back your tariffs to only 10%. That'll cause just a little pain with you. Uh and also Trump is uh telling them to talk to his chairman of economic adviserss uh Steven Mirren and says well uh we want you to really bear the costs of the cold war. Remember, we're protecting you against uh the the threat of having to trade with China and uh let China invest in uh your infrastructure and develop the uh the the roads and the railroads in order to have trade. Uh we in order to fight them, it's cost money and you're going to have to pay just as Europe and Germany's agreed to pay. Now, remember, Germany's been willing to stop uh oil and gas trade with Russia and dismantle its industry just to support the Cold War. We want you to do that. And if you don't agree to that in the next three months, then uh we're not going to uh uh refrain from imposing our tariffs of 40% or so. Uh this is nonsense. And uh Trump is not only Trump but the US Congress has uh outlined exactly what this deal is going to be that's going to make China uh so much uh uh money. Uh it's going to reduce trade on non national security items uh the tariffs to maybe uh 30% uh but 100% on any trade that has anything to do with national security. Well, uh the footnote is everything is national security. Uh and it's up to uh Congress and especially the committee uh that is staffed with China haters to uh decide exactly what's national security. So uh the what is uh being offered to China is uh economic suicide basically and a lose lose-lose deal. There's absolutely no chance uh of that happening at all. Uh and you you can see the fight that's going on uh this week in Washington at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank meetings. All of the Chinese uh officials who are dealing with international finance and international trader are there. Uh there haven't been any meetings reported with uh US officials at all. There have been a lot of Chinese statements uh saying that they are not going to negotiate at gunpoint and uh under threats. They're only going to talk among equals. I don't see China making any deal at all with the United States or even uh seriously talking until the three months uh are are over of Trump's negotiations with other countries. And if China sees that uh the US is trying really to uh draw an iron curtain against China, then obviously it's going to go right ahead uh with uh not only with its tariffs on US exports, but more important its uh refusal to export commodities that are critical for the American national security, meaning uh the military like the rare earth metals and uh all sorts of computer chips and others. Uh the the sanctions uh against trade with high technology that is critical for uh military spending for uh the creating a monopoly in information technology goods. Uh all of this uh really is more in control of China than the United States. So, it looks to me like the United States has nothing to offer except threats. And the opening demands of Trump in his usual ways make a a huge demand that uh is a mind expansion for the adversary country. And they're so surprised at how absurd and crazy and uh destructive this demand is that then uh Trump can say okay well let's talk about how we can cut it back having established an uh ridiculous uh demand as his opening gambit. Uh china is just going to walk right away. Uh I don't see uh it negotiating at all. Uh and uh I it when you look at uh how the stock market has sort of recovered as if uh oh we can all go back to normal uh as we did on Monday and the stock market's go gone up uh 5%. Uh well the dollar has gone down 6% since uh Trump took office. There's an idea that all of this is reversible. That uh the uh Trump's uh disruption of international trade is uh uh can all be sort of reversed and it's as if now he's seen the light and to look at the Wall Street Journal or the New York Times. Uh it's as if uh everything uh that that when Trump said he'll reappoint the head uh of the Federal Reserve Powell that everybody aside with relief. But it's has nothing to do with the Federal Reserve. It's all about the cold war in China. And this is uh the point that you China is making is precisely that and that is almost unthinkable for uh the US press and even for Congress and uh for the government to think about it. So it looks to me like uh this dream world of seeming recovery everything is going to be restabilized is going to be uh is going to be lost. uh later I can explain exactly what I think is going to happen uh and what all of the strains are but that's the big picture. Well for me the first way to comment on this is to retell the old story of the protection racket. You know, the two tough guys in trench coats who come into the little dry cleaning establishment somewhere in the city and inform the proprietor that they're there to collect the $200 a week of protection money. And the proprietor looks at them having never seen them before and says, "What do I need protection from?" Laughing. and they say, "Well, you need it from us because if you don't give us the money, uh, your your establishment will burn down early next week, so you can pay protection or not." Then, Mr. Trump, in the clip you just showed us, tell us that either they make a deal or we will set the deal and we will be fair. In other words, the world is supposed to do what the United States thinks is fair. The United States thought it was fair to move NATO right up to Russia's borders over the last 10 years. That didn't work out real well. It turns out other people's notion of fair is not the same as yours. Most adults have figured that out by the time they reach adulthood. That's why you have to work things out. You can't just threaten people and assume that they will therefore allow your definition of fair to stand. That mentality which mistakes power for something having to do with fairness, which needs to cover the exertion of power with a veneer of fairness. That reminds me of the last 80 years of the American Empire, which covered over its power moves by claiming that it was bringing democracy to everybody. I mean, that is not going to fool anyone anymore. It's it's amazing that it fooled anyone ever. Anyhow, so the problem here is the United States is frustrated. It hasn't been able to utilize its power in the present the way it in fact was in the past. I hate to keep going back to the end of World War II, but the second half of the 20th century was a very special time in which the United States emerged from World War II the only dominant economic, political, ideological and military power. That was an extraordinary situation. had not existed in the world for quite some time. Even the British Empire wasn't as totally dominant, having not come out of a world war the way the American did. And it was only a matter of time, which anyone looking at this situation would have known. And there were voices who said this as early as the 1940s. This is an odd situation, those voices said. Even George Kennan, who was enthusiastic about the American Empire, kept warning people that the control of the Soviet Union was not going to be easy and you better contain them, otherwise your dominance is going to be threatened. And they followed his advice because somewhere they also knew that when you're the dominant power, you also become Hegel's contribution of contradiction. You also become highly vulnerable because everybody else dominated by you begins to try to undo your domination. It's the master slave dichotomy. The slave is the slave of the ma master and the master then becomes the slave of the condition of having a slave. It's a very old understanding. It's a shame that people don't study Mr. Hegel the way previous generations did to their benefit. All right. Having said that, let me deal with your question. I'm gonna strongly state what Mr. Trump has done has irreducibly and irreversibly altered the global economic situation. It's too late now. He's done the damage. How he manages the damage and how his successors manage the damage. That's more open. But let me briefly summarize the damage. every country on this planet and every company that either buys from or sells to the United States and that is many many companies in every country across the world has now undertaken it's already done a rethinking of their business model of their plans of their investments [Music] And the reason is simple. The United States has shown the world that it is dangerous to depend on the United States for anything you buy, for anything you sell. their political leaders. And by the way, this includes the Democrats who by their silence seem to be more or less not the enemies of what Mr. Trump is doing, adopting rather a wait and see. If it works out, we won't oppose it because it's not politically cute for us to do. So the rest of the world sees Mr. Trump without meaningful domestic opposition yet able to what? Well, let's look look at what Michael just said. To hurt them to hurt them with a 10% tariff, a 20% tariff, sanctions maybe. If not sanctions on them, sanctions on people who do business with them. This is a wholescale attack on them. It hurts them. It It reduces their profits. It thereby reduces the taxes they pay to their own governments. I could go on. If they have made a a unilateral decision that leads every country and every company to start looking much more intensely at finding alternative sources of inputs and imports to those countries and alternatives to the United States as an export market just out of the logic of profit maximization and the logic of risk minimization. which are the rules of capitalist businesses. And they're not going to change that unless there were a virtual revolution in the United States in which an alternative political uh leadership emerged that clearly and powerfully had an alternative plan that didn't involve tariffs, sanction, and there is no such thing. Well, Richard, you've made the point very eloquent eloquently and I agree with it all and the way you describe it in this protection racket whose house is really going to burn down. Uh let's look at in the case of uh Europe in the United States whose house burned down well it turned out to be Germany and Europe's house that's burning down. uh will the global south and global majority countries and the bricks uh look at this and say we don't want to uh suffer the same fate that Germany and other countries did. Uh we have to look at the long term and the long term is that the United States is going into a depression. uh uh Goldman Sachs uh and the IMF are agreements that had just came into that. They're looking at the fact that the dollar is going to continue to go down uh another five to 10% on top of the five to 6% it's already gone down under Trump. That means that uh foreign if uh countries uh have foreign investment in the United States, however much they make in interest or however uh much they make in dividends or even capital gains is being wiped out by the degree to which the dollar is going down. And that is exactly what Trump is uh says is his objective. And again his council of economic adviserss say well uh the other countries have to bear the cost of this cold war uh against uh China and uh this war is all to prevent you countries from dealing with China and you have to bear the costs of our military fighting all over the world uh to help isolate China. This is uh so heavy a longterm cost that I don't think these countries are going to say well we're going to live in the short term. We're politicians. Politicians live in the short run. We want to keep the US market in the short run. So don't raise your tariffs. We will give up the next 20, 30 or 50 years of our development in order uh just uh to have another years of uh agreement with the United States. No one can really do that. Or of course uh you can have uh leaders like merits in Germany and the other European leaders who uh like France and uh England who uh who can do it but they'll be voted out of power very quickly. So uh this is uh this is the the instability that I see. You you've seen in the last few weeks uh the uh Scott Bessant has gone uh to Argentina and Latin American countries telling them don't trade with China. He's put a special pressure on Argentina because he said we want to use you as a military base to control Antarctica. If uh Russia is trying to control the Arctic, we want to control Antarctica and u we are going to try to uh you know make uh you loans but we want you to stop trading with uh there's already pressure stop trading with China. Well, Argentina trades as much with chi China as it does with the United States. And despite the fact that Melee is a right-wing uh neoliberal, uh he's uh so far uh boalked at uh the US uh demands uh for that. Well, uh what this shows is is what uh what the Cold War is really all about. Uh it it's it's not simply the United States against China. uh is against is the rest of the world going to be uh neoliberal pushing a privatization of government uh as if the world's run by Elon Musk uh cutting off government and turning it all over to the uh 1% uh in the financial sector to buy up or is the rest of the world going to follow the road that made China rich by creating a socialist mixed public private econ economy. Well, that's the only way for other any nation to industrialize. You keep natural monopolies, transportation, communication, and especially money and banking as public utilities in the public domain to provide services at subsidized prices or freely to help the economy grow. That's the opposite philosophy that from uh the United States, which is short- termism, turning almost all of the gains in wealth to the 1%, not uh trying to raise living standards and productivity for the 99% which is uh China's aim. That's really what all of all of this is about. So what's ch uh th this is the the context for what's happening and uh again I I can talk about China's strategy uh for all of this but China realizes this there's no uh friendly talk between President Xi and other Chinese diplomats and the United States for the first time you know that I can remember Chinese diplomat has spoken very rudely to the United States and said, "Look, we're just not going to talk uh on these terms." Uh I think that's going to be the future. And uh it's not even about tariffs anymore. It's about uh China's cutting just refusal to make exports of key products to the United States that uh the United States uh military and the information technology, computer uh technology uh needs uh in order to operate. So, we're really seeing uh a a a breakdown in world trade and investment that's going to uh be the opportunity for a a restructuring uh of world trade. And as just as you said, Richard, other countries are saying, which direction do we want to go? We're being forced to go in one or the other. the United States uh is trying to block us from uh uh into dependency on it. And uh we've all seen that you can't depend on Trump because once you give into him on the first uh uh demand that he makes as in the case of law firms uh and his attack on universities, he'll then make another demand. And no matter what Trump would promise uh China and uh Congress would oppose it because Congress is dominated right now just as much as Trump with just as much an anti- Chinese policy realizing it's all about what kind of economic and social structure the world's going to have. Will it be uh a will they follow the Chinese model or the US neoliberal model? Will they follow will they end up like Germany and Europe or will they find end up more like China? Richard, I think what the question would be what would be the path forward for the United States and China? Well, let me say a word about Europe to take it a little step further. The second half of the 20th century and the first 20 years of this one have seen the leadership of Europe mostly dominated by what we call centerright uh political figures and they have had one basic theme that the United States is wonderful and the protector of everybody and the evil is the Soviet Union and now the evil is Russia that our policy is self-p protection. We're protecting you all say these right-wing leaders to their own people. Vote for us because we are the bosom buddies of the United States lined up via NATO to confront and contain the Soviet Union, now Russia. This policy is now dead. The United States has said to the whole of Europe, "You can be anti-Russian if you like, but we're not playing anymore. We're not going to do all of this. We're not going to fight Russia in Ukraine anymore, etc., etc." That left the Europeans in power with half of a policy. being close to the United States, they couldn't do anymore because the United States was saying that the war in Ukraine was over or a mistake or a failure. So, what they're left with is pure anti-Russianism. It's pathetic to watch. This is when you're riding half a bicycle. You know what happens if you ride half a bicycle? You fall over. You may take a few moments, but you're going to fall over because you need two and you only got one. The right wing in in Europe is desperate. Pay attention to how they talk. You can see it. Their whole policy is ferocious anti-Russianism, which is why they line up behind Zalinski and other odd choices. But here's an important point that comes from what Michael just said about Argentina. While they're doing all this, they are in fact more and more dependent on China. The Europeans need to cultivate China. And I think if you see now the decision to move their assets and invest heavily in military production at the expense therefore of the European standard of living because what else can they do? You're you're setting up conditions for what Michael said, for a rapid, sharp leftwing shift of power in Europe. The conditions for it, the political parties to articulate are all in place. What has to happen is a recognition particularly by the business communities there that just like in Argentina they don't want to lose the business with China which is crucial the same is true for the actual and the potential business of Europe in China which the difficulties with the United States ironically make more urgent ent for Europe than they were before. They are among the countries I referred to before that are rethinking and have to. And if the right-wing leadership is too compromised to do it, then the left-wing leadership will become attractive to the business community, which will oppose it less than they used to. And that's probably all the left there needs to come into power. How they will use such a power, I don't know. I don't think they do either. But you can see the reorganization of the world economy that Nema is asking is happening for Europe as well because they're not immune to everything uh everything that we have been saying appropo of of the the strategy towards China at least for the last 15 years and maybe longer the policy of the United States has been regime change in China, not just in Russia, in China. They would like China to be uh a cooperative, subordinate, but powerful uh member of the community of capitalist nations. That's what they would like. and they've taken many steps and they've said that over and over again. The standard story in Washington that I hear from the people I know there because of my education I know a lot of these people they were my schoolmates and so on has always been the same. Get quote China to be a proper member of the community of nations. That's why we brought them into the World Trade Organization. That's why Kissinger and Nixon went there in the first place in the 1970s. And we have had to v vary our policy. But that's what we want. They should become more and more private in their hybrid mix of private and state enterprises. They should therefore become more dependent on monetary and fiscal policy rather than the more direct interventions that they practice in their economy. And that's all. Now they want to use tariffs because the other the other mechanisms of pressuring them in that direction failed. They didn't work and it's clear they are not about to work either. They've become too rich too fast and too big too fast. You you haven't got levers of power over them. Okay. Now you're going to use Here comes the desperation again. You're going to use the last big club you have to get them to do that. And they're letting you know by everything Michael just said, they're not going to do it. It's not going to work. You waited too long. You might have tried this 30 years ago, but not now. Not now. Can't do it now. Too late. And if you look at the Chinese, not only in terms of what they've done in their country, but having crafted, and I mean crafted the bricks as a allied nations, wow, that is an extraordinarily crucial because where will China go if they can't trade with the United States? If Mr. Trump carries it through and really does isolate them. The answer is the bricks. That's their first defense to reorganize their imports and exports, which those BRICS countries will be having to do, too. Both sides having to reconnect out of the US into their own. I read a speech the other day, I believe, of Mr. the Treasury Secretary in which he advises the Chinese. By the way, the arrogance is overwhelming, but he advises the Chinese to be less exportd dependent and to do more to develop their internal market. Well, only a person who has no idea what the Chinese have been doing for 20 years would say such a thing because they've been doing that for 20 years. That's why the real wages in China have gone up four times over the last 25 years while America's real wages have been stagnant for the same 20 years. There it is. Of course, they're building their domestic. But they also have allies. They don't actually have to depend totally on their domestic because they really have allies. And the tariffs by being uniform are pushing all their allies to work closer with China to become a s self-sufficient world economic power. And since they are now larger than the west, that they have more of a power base economically speaking than the west does. and they have shown the capability of doing the most advanced technological breakthrough. You are looking at a split world economy where the odds are better for China to come out on top of that than for the United States and all the makebelieve in the world isn't going to change that. Well, here's the problem. uh when you you're talking about that uh the need for a Europe to have a left-wing swing in order to uh basically uh survive. But there's the only leftwing party that I've seen in Germany is Sarah Vagenck's uh party and uh she she either uh by manip voter manipulation or otherwise did not meet the 5% she was just below the 5% limit uh to get in to Congress. Uh the in order for uh Europe to take a left-wing swing, they need an ideology. Now, of course, you and I have been spending our lives trying to uh trying to uh provide exactly that kind of logic for how do you develop a an economy that's going to work? And it's what uh we have to use the word socialism uh to say that because it uh involves a public uh a government strong enough to prevent a creditor financial oligarchy from developing and doing to the economy what it's done to the United States and Western Europe. de-industrializing it, financializing it, making the path to wealth um a form of making financial gains, not industrial gains, not labor productivity gains, not developing the internal market. Uh there's the internal ideology and this is a problem not only for Europe, but I think for many BRICS countries. Uh many of these countries are not left-wing. uh and some are outright wife right-wing. How are you going how are you and I I guess we're the the main people who were trying to promote this. How are we to spread this ideology the idea of how to create a development plan that is going to uh to develop? Well, look at the contrast between what you and I are talking about a left-wing plan and what tariff what uh Trump is saying. Trump is saying all we need to do to re-industrialize the United States is to have tariffs. Well, uh he said, "Look at the 19th century." Well, as we've spoken before on this program, uh tariffs uh worked because the United States had very active uh government uh investment in railroads, communications uh and social social spending to uh create a high wage, high productivity labor force. This is not what uh Trump uh uh intends to uh accompany his protective uh his high tariff rates that really are not protective because there's no industry to protect and it's very hard to see how the United States can uh develop an industry. Well, apply this to the uh third world countries. How are they going to uh de develop? not only by trade with China but by restructuring their economy along the same lines that made the United States an industrial power in the 19th century, Germany an industrial power uh in the 19th century all with active uh government uh in investment and what was called by almost all parts of the political spectrum from the left to the right socialists. John Stewart Mill the free marketer called himself a socialist. Uh many Christians founded a Christian socialist party. Even the Catholics had uh Catholic socialism. Uh there was anarchctic socialism. not only Marxian socialism but all sorts of communitarian communalist socialism uh that that has become uh such a uh a a politic a politically uh a word that it just triggers uh American opposition and it's almost as if the McCarthyism uh that you've seen today when it comes to talking about Russia or China uh as uh a third rail. The you're almost seeing this uh in uh global south countries and the brick countries. So the big question is for these changes to take place. It requires more than just trading with China. It it uh requires going along with creating an infrastructure. Well, that's just what China's promising to do in its belt and road. It begins by saying, well, you're going to have to have uh transportation infrastructure. Uh you're going to have to uh uh develop your economy in in uh along these lines. And uh the advantage that China has over the United States is uh it is not necessarily taking its payments in uh in the way that the uh US bond holders do. It's not saying you have to pay us in dollars or our currency. you pay us in kind. Either uh we will take an equity position in uh the infrastructure that we create and we'll only uh take what uh is actually the returns uh uh for for this or we'll take our payments in the products uh that you you're producing. They're not using the investment as a lever to force them into debt uh and into reliance on the International Monetary Fund that pushes anti- labor right-wing uh development plans uh on everything. So uh the issue is not simply trade with China. It's creating a whole uh full-fledged alternative to the uh International Monetary Fund and World Bank and uh the economic structure that the United States imposed after World War II in its own interest uh to essentially concentrate all the wealth in its own hands instead of having other countries use their wealth to improve their capital, their uh public investment, their infrastructure, and all the uh capital investment that's needed to really industrialize and raise living standards. And let me respond, Nema, because I think there's an important point here. I agree with Michael. The BRICS countries are very heterogeneous, left-wing, right-wing, no question about that. They're not they're not all China, not by a long shot, etc., etc. But let me spell out a scenario and and it's only a possibility. I don't believe in predicting the future. I'm not telling anyone what I'm about to describe is going to happen. But I am telling you it might happen. And here is the reason I think so. It comes out of American history. When when Franklin Roosevelt early in the depression ran for president, he ran as a middleof the road conventional Democrat. He advocated a balanced budget even in the middle of the kind of crash uh that he was living through at the whole country. He went to the left because the mass of people went to the left in the United States. Huge numbers joined two socialist and one communist party and they alto together mobilized and were the militants of the CIO which was the greatest unionization drive in all of American history before or since. Okay. They then went to Mr. Trump, excuse me, to Mr. Roosevelt and said, "You have to move to the left with us or we're voting you out of office. You're not going to stay here." Uh, and he he understood the the the argument. They they had mobilized millions of people. They could control those votes. He'd be out. His political future finished. So, he went with them. out of opportunism. No question about it. But what did he do? He created then under the pressure from below social security, which we never had before, a government pension program, a minimum wage, which we never had before, uh an unemployment compensation program at the federal level, which we'd never had before, and he hired 15 million people on the government payroll, which we had never had before. spectacular changes. Okay, why am I telling you this? Because if we now at the end of the desperate gestures of Mr. Trump generate a global inflation/recession or the stagflation that more and more are contemplating is coming. We may well have what Michael referred to before when he had a a slip. He meant the word recession if you heard at the beginning of the program, but out came depression. Yeah, exactly. There's more wisdom there than there is a slip of the tongue. Okay. What's going to happen? The mass of people are going to go to the leaders of the BRICS countries and say we now need salvation from stagflation. The United States is the cause. China might be the solution. And out of that would come what I described before an accommodation despite center right or other leaders in brick under they would either have to accommodate the way Roosevelt had to or they'd have to get out of the way because other forces will make that claim. I don't think that's fanciful anymore. Do I say it's going to happen for sure? Of course not. I can't predict the future any better than anybody else can. Which is to say we cannot. But is that a possibility emerging here? Absolutely. It is a possibility. And it is a possibility that would address obstacles to the process that's already underway but that the United States wants to hold back to prevent even to reverse that it cannot do and that makes this scenario possible in the future despite the heterogeneity of bricks uh governments their difference from the Chinese and so on. And I wouldn't discount it. I think you're seeing I'm amazed at how fast everything is going. There are now in the mainstream of the American financial press constant stories. There were half a dozen this morning before I I came into our program here in which the decline of the dollar, the decline of the dollar as a safe haven, the decline of US treasuries as a safe haven. Here we are in a period of turmoil. Here we are with an imminence of recession. And where is the money going? Not into the dollar. It's not the safety. It's not the riskless asset that it used to be. This is a momentous shifting of the whole flow of short and medium-term capital around the world responding to the kind of change that you Nema at the beginning of today asked us to talk about. Well, it turned I think in my view uh the decline of the dollar is the key catalyst to all of this change. Uh the my whole theory of superimperialism uh that I developed the 1972 was when the United States went off gold, it left other central banks with only one alternative to hold their international savings. And that was loans to the uh US Treasury in the form of uh spending their dollars that the United States was throwing off mainly by its military spending abroad. they recycled it uh in the United States to essentially the effect was to give the United States a free ride. uh this using the dollar as the form of other people's savings enabled the United States to spend uh a constant balance of payments deficit largely military uh on uh structuring the world along the lines that uh it wanted. Well uh the other why did other countries do it? If if uh France and Germany and other uh payment surplus countries in later China did not spend their dollar s uh their foreign trade and balance of payment surpluses back in to the United States, their currencies would rise against uh not only the dollar but other countries uh whose currencies were traded uh in dollars and therefore they they're uh uh uh exports become less competitive because of financial uh manip uh the purely financial factors not productivity factors but purely the uh exchange rate factors once countries break away once the United States takes the lead in dis in dismantling this whole key that has been the uh the buttress of America's cold war spending and superimperialism. Once this key goes, there goes the whole means of financing the American balance of payments deficit. And imagine what would happen if the United States no longer had the free ride of other countries uh using their economic savings and surpluses from uh uh supporting uh the US balance of payments and and treasuries. uh that America would have to do what England had to do when it lost its empire. It would have to raise interest rates very sharply to support it exchange rates. It would lose the the free lunch that it had been getting from controlling the Sterling area. Uh it would all of a sudden have to rely on its own internal resources. And yet it had dissipated these resources by thinking, well, we don't have to industrialize. we can just depend on other countries uh financing us because we've con we've structured the sterling area and the payment system to do this. Well, America broke up that system of uh the Sterling area and also the French Frank area uh in 1945 at the end of World War II. But now the United States faces the prospect of turning itself into England. And what if it has to rely on its own domestic uh productive capacity uh when it's already de-industrialized it by offshoring its uh industry to China and other Asian countries in order to have cheaper labor costs instead of hiring US labor uh is part of the class war of American industry and the financial sector against labor. This is the whole pro. This is where all of this is ending. This is the horror story of the uh of what would happen to turn America into having to pay its own way and being just another country instead of the recipient of the world's savings. Uh and yet this seems to be the stated objective of uh the Trump administration and Vance and the Council of Economic Advisors to lower the dollar's exchange rate. Well, the only solution for that has been uh uh the Trump uh administration suggestion uh let other countries buy a 100red-year uh b uh US government bonds and see what they'll get after 100 years uh where the dollar continues to decline uh unless it can somehow become a different economy uh than it is. That's the real question. uh when all of these changes take place and this realignment of world trade and investment with China that we've been talking about when that occurs uh will the United States have to restructure its own economy uh and somehow that would end the cold war fight between neoliberal financialized economies centered in the United States and Europe and uh econ pro- labor pro-investment progrowth economies following the uh the Chinese Asian model which itself is reinventing the wheel that the United States and Germany uh developed in the 19th century and British mercantalism long before that in the 18th c century. You know, it reminds me this conversation. What we're doing is we're telling a story in which profit maximizing behavior by capitalists leads them to take steps which then come back and undermine their ability to profit maximize. In other words, that the system has built into it fundamental contradictions and those can be postponed, those can be deferred, but they don't go away and they will one day when the conditions vary come right back up and bite you. You know, it reminds me early in Marx's capital, he makes an observation which I remember reading and being stunned by. It goes in modern English. It would go like this. Every capitalist is told minimize your labor costs, minimize, you know, replace your workers with machines. Replace expensive workers with cheap workers. Replace, you know, and on and on and on. And then he points out, but of course this profitm maximizing strategy of minimizing your wage bill comes back to bite you because it's the workers wages which enable them to buy back what you're trying to sell. and their inability to do that will be as depressing on your profitability as bumping down their wages wasn't and if the conditions vary this could come back and be a disaster this program of minimizing your wages. That's what that's what we're doing now. We're explaining how moving production out of the United States, becoming the financialized sector, whether we apply it to the role of London in the collapse of the British Empire or the role of the United States in the collapse of its empire is an example where the pursuit of profits negative its contradictory implications come back and overwhelm the system. And the that's usually a moment of crisis for the system and in moments of crisis big shifts occur. Hence my proposal or idea that both for Europe now but for the whole bricks conglomerate uh moments of truth are getting closer and closer as the United States takes more extreme measures to make the world pay for its empire or for the survival of its empire. It provokes the world to say, "Wait a minute. This doesn't work for us. This is too dangerous, too costly. We're not." And we have an option. And that option may mean we have to get into bed with the Chinese. However uncomfortable that makes us feel, that's our only way out here. Yeah. Yeah, profits are made by industrial firms and uh industrial firms uh at least uh under industrial capitalism reinvest their profits in uh building more factories and more means of production to hire more labor and that's increasing. But uh today I I don't think the aim is to make profits anymore. It's to make capital gains uh by financial engineering that are financed by debt leveraging uh borrowing money to take over companies and de-industrialize them and economic rents. uh the uh the uh Trump and the uh the Democrats especially have said the ideal is to create America is a rantier rentseeking economy and the rents that we're seeking are monopoly rents uh primarily and these monopoly rents uh that we're really trying to get is an information technology high-tech uh computer chips uh and computerization and if we can block China from uh having access to uh and being able to sell its computer chips and its information technology system abroad. And then we can make other countries dependent on our information technology. And if we do that, then we can threaten to cut them off from this technology if they don't follow the US diplomatic uh uh directives. uh just as uh we once used agricultural uh sanctions to try to starve countries into following uh US demands. Well, uh, China realizes this and it's already, uh, taken the step to stop this by stopping its, uh, exports of, uh, rare earth metals and the other, uh, computer chip technology that is absolutely essential for, uh, the American and European and actually anybody else's uh, uh, ability to uh, create a monopoly in information technology without spending five uh years or even more uh with a huge environmental costs to create refinery uh production in their own country to create uh not only the rare earth metals but all sorts of uh uh long-term uh planning and research and development that uh China has been spending its uh economic uh returns on uh to invest in and the United States has fallen behind not only uh so much in its dependency on uh abil on its ability to uh on on products uh from raw materials to indust to uh computer technology that comes from China that it it is unable to compete within the next uh five-year time frame and China has the uh China doesn't have to do anything at all except what it's already done in the last month or two, saying that we are not going to provide the United States with the materials that it needs to create a monopoly to fight us and uh try to uh divide the world into uh countries that are dependent on US high-tech exports uh and that Chinese exports. The Chinese are ahead in robotization uh in uh in factory uh design in almost uh uh just as Russia and China are ahead in in military weaponry from American technology. So America has is no longer in the position that we've talked about it had in 1945. uh it's become a uh a laggered country and the laggered country is because it's financialized not seeking profits by seeking financial gains that have been made by de-industrializing uh the rest of the economy and it's uh and trying to replace industrial profits with monopoly rents with land rents for real estate by untaxing real estate by natural resource rents uh by rent seeking just the uh essentially the this is uh what industrial capitalism was supposed to free markets from these legacies of feudalism, a landlord class, a monopoly class and a a predatory banking class. All of that is come is coming back uh under the leadership of the United States uh leaving other countries. It's ironically uh China with socialist characteristics. You should say, you could just as well say China with industrial capitalist uh characteristics based on profits made by uh improving the internal market and raising labor productivity, which was the original um plan of capitalism as outlined by Adam Smith and all of the classical economists of the 19th century. Yeah. If Yeah. One last word to show the danger that we're in. If Michael is right, if the United States is hellbent on cashing in on its only way forward, namely to be a monopolist of a certain set of things and siphon the surplus from the rest of the world because they won't be able to do industrial production without the monopolized mechanisms or means to do it. and that the money will come in rather like London was able to siphon surplus from the rest of the world as its empire declined. We still have to notice that being a monopolist in the end is not a way to employ 330 million Americans. and that the whole AI revolution and the whole Musk wholesale firing of federal employees is a symbolic taste of where this is taking the United States because the gap between rich and poor, between urban and rural, between, you know, skilled and educated on the one hand and not on the other. Those are becoming extreme dichotoies and that might be sustainable for a while if you had been used to it for hundreds of years. But the United States for the last century has celebrated itself as a middle class society in which everybody is entitled to to get the quote American dream. that's over and that will become harder and harder to sustain and will turn people at first to the first demagogue who cashes in on it by the name of Trump. But there will be others from the left as well as the right who are going to speak to that condition and that raises a whole new set of contradictions for the way this is evolving. Absolutely right. I don't see these uh new uh politicians coming from the Democratic Party. No. No. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael. Great pleasure as always. Okay. Good conversation. It really take care. Bye-bye. Take care.