Hi everybody. Today's Thursday, December 18, 2025 and our dear friends Michael Hudson and Richard Wolf are here with us. Michael from New York and Richard is in Paris in France. Welcome back. >> Thank you. Glad to be here. >> Please subscribe >> literally to be there. [laughter] Please subscribe and hit like button. You can follow Michael on his website michael-hudson.com and Richard on his YouTube channel democracyatwork or on his website democracyatwork.info. Let me start Michael with you and the situation with Venezuela. You know, yesterday we've learned from Tucker Carlson that Donald Trump wants to declare war on Venezuela. And Donald Trump himself, he said something so strange when he's talking about oil and the land of Venezuela. It's he's the way that he's talking about those, you know, properties, Venezuelan properties. It seems that they're belonging to the United States. Here is what Donald Trump said. and oil rights, whatever we had, they took it away because we had a president that maybe wasn't watching, but they're not going to do that. We want it back. They they took our oil rights. We had a lot of oil there, as you know. They threw our companies out, and we want it back. >> Michael, looking at what Donald Trump said last night, and do you think that he's getting more hawkish toward Venezuela or he's chickening out? Well, he's certainly more hawkish. And uh yesterday uh I had expected that our talk this morning was going to be all about uh Trump declares war on Venezuela because uh yesterday Tucker Carlson uh came out with an announcement that was picked up all over the internet Yahoo saying uh uh here's what I know so far which is that members of Congress were briefed yesterday that a war is coming and it'll be announced in the address to the nation tonight at 9:00 by the president. Well, naturally I thought, okay, we're going to talk about war. Uh, and I listened and it was uh such it was a boring speech. Trump didn't know what to say talking about nothing except that America's inflation was going down. Life has never been better for American working class and it's going to get much better. He has his own health care that you won't have insurance companies anymore. you can everybody for himself uh negotiating. So u the evidently the navy must have talked to him and said uh look uh Russia and China have provided Venezuela with uh arms uh to shoot down uh ships and we've done the war game. if uh you really go to war with Venezuela by saying you're going to bomb them. Uh Trump did say didn't say he's going to invade. He said we are going to destroy them on land. In other words, missiles. Well, obviously Venezuela is prepared with the Russian and Chinese defenses and its own defenses to blow up uh the ships. And uh the army obviously took uh talked him out of it. And uh that's why he sort of floundered for his 25minut speech. Well uh here's the problem. He Trump is trying to blame the foreigners. As you just said, uh he accused Venezuela of stealing their oil and he wants to put things back the way they were. The way they were was under dictators throughout Latin America like Paris Himenes in Venezuela. uh and they were like the way they were in Cuba before Castro with Batista uh and the government there. The way they were was these countries were uh totally in uh American control which uh Trump likes to call the American sphere of influence and that's what the national security strategy did. We control uh the oil. So, uh, Trump has said that, uh, these ships, uh, are we're going to block any of this shadow fleet that has been selling $8 billion a year of Venezuela's oil exports. Uh, and we're we're going to prevent them from trading, just as we're preventing uh, Russia from trading its oil by uh, blocking by blocking its tankers. Uh Trump has already on November 29th seized one Venezuela uh tanker and brought it uh uh to to American sh uh controlled shores and said uh you know we we confiscated the oil and took it for oursel we're taking our oil. anything that Venezuela has belongs to me. Uh that and despite the fact that the oil companies all negotiated with Venezuela agreements sort of based on what they had done with Saudi Arabia. Uh yes, nationalize the oil. All we want is to be able to uh produce the oil and market it and get all of the benefits. Well, uh, Venezuela, the reason that Venezuela had nationalized this is they'd been exploited, uh, under the dictatorship and a one one uh, way laws and Venezuela's like for foreign oil was being depleted and the oil industry has a depletion allowance in the United States. the oil that they deplete in Venezuela or any other country their branches is a tax credit against the American income tax not the countries themselves uh don't get uh any benefit from their oil being depleted and all of this depletion allowance is counted as a as a a cost of production reducing their profits and so the Venezuela saw that The American oil companies simply don't report any profits to pay their income tax on. They sell Venezuela's oil at a very low price to the refineries offshore mainly in Trinidad uh at a very low price and Trinidad through a Panameanian company then uh controlled by the oil companies like Standard Oil will sell this uh oil that it buys from Venezuela at a low price at a huge markup to the Panameanian company that sells it to the United States at a at a higher price. All of this is tax avoidance. And this is why other countries don't want American oil firms to come because they don't get any money from it. It's a it's a one-day deal. And Trump says, "If you don't let us steal your oil, you're stealing our property because we have the right to steer to steal your oil because that's our sphere of influence. Uh and we can uh do what what they want." And he's willing u apparently to go to war. He's very bilicos and he thought that that would make him popular. But apparently the Republicans did polls and they found out that Americans really don't want to go to war uh in Venezuela anymore than they want to uh keep going to war in Ukraine. So Trump's trying to do two things. He's trying to assert total US control of the world's oil trade. uh not only to isolate other oil countries like Russia, Iran, and Venezuela, but also he's he's trying to uh prevent the rest of the world from pursuing alternatives to oil like uh green energy through wind power and solar power because that's where China has an an advantage. and he and he he's not only grabbed wants to grab Venezuela's oil, he's just grabbed Russia's Luke oil company and said that uh any Russian oil distributor or oil company in Europe that has more than 50% ownership uh we get to grab because uh Russia's the bad guy. uh and uh this is economic war and uh if uh according to the law of the sea u blocking oil trade from Venezuela uh and Iran and China, China gets about 4% of its oil from Venezuela uh is legally defined as an act of war and an act of war actually becomes military war at a point. That's uh that's where we are right now. Yeah, I would like to add [clears throat and cough] to what Michael has said by by noticing a parallel. If you look at that national security uh document back on that was released on December 4th and you read the rewrite of history that is in that document, you will learn that at the end of World War II, the correct history is not what we have all thought it was the end of all the European empires and they're being replaced by the United States. the end of the British pound as the global currency replaced by the US dollar, the development of 700 military bases all around Russia and then around China to contain communism. None of that is really what was going on. What you get in that statement and obviously this is the thinking of Mr. Trump but also of the whole entourage around him is a completely different story. a story of the victimization of the United States. Mr. Trump goes go repeatedly goes around and he's done it in other forums as well explaining how the British and the Canadians and the Mexicans and the Europeans have been ripping us off, treating us badly, behaving inappropriately, just on and on. If you believe this, then the last 75 years would be a a delegation of the entire American political establishment, Republican and Democratic alike, as moronic incompetence who are now being finally replaced by a smart guy, Mr. Trump. and he is not going to let us be ripped off. So of course he has to rewrite the history of each particular chapter in this rewrite of history. One chapter is the deal Venezuela made years ago with the oil companies. I remember uh civil civil service or one of the companies was a major company that they dealt with uh through which they sold here in the United States and they paid a sum for that uh in the same way that oil was nationalized in most of the countries in the world that have oil. They took that step. Why? Because they wanted a bit of the action from the oil business. Otherwise, it was simply monopolized by the seven large oil companies that took it from them and then sold it at whatever price they could get in the world market. Whether they Saudi Arabia or Egypt, they all wanted a piece of what was going on. And the West understood, especially after the the war in the Suez Canal 1955, that they had to come to some sort of terms with that. Iran had erupted, Egypt had erupted. They could not rely on the Israeli presence uh to prevent these things. They made a deal. All that is forgotten. All that is rewritten into a a story to justify. The story to justify tariffs was this notion that we've been abused for 75 years. And the reason I'm going through this is all of the people who cannot bring themselves to oppose the Trump government and that includes Wall Street Journal, New York Times and all the rest of them. They are going to take seriously sooner or later if they haven't already this rewrite of history. And it's very important that everyone understand what makebelieve this all. This is make believe. But it is done so crudely, so suddenly so without the slightest shred of evidence that it's possible for someone like you, Nema, quite correctly to identify the interesting use of the adjective our oil. This oil has magically become our oil. Not Venezuelan oil or Latin American oil or oil period, but ours as if it was property of the United States. And then he carries out his usual story that a stupid president, notice how he said it, sometime back then, allowed this theft to happen. Is it is it do you want me to say comment on that? Uh I'm glad you talked about the rewriting of history after World War II. uh because that's uh the key not only to Trump but to the national security uh when Trump is justifying all of this move in Latin America uh saying this is uh the my new Monroe doctrine and uh what the sphere of influence that's uh the national security uh statement said is that's the western hemisphere but it's not only the western hemisphere it's also So Asia with all of the US military bases surrounding China and Russia and uh it it uh what has happened is that there's a a fictitious history. The United States uh essentially is going to monopolize control of all of Latin America and the Caribbean for itself. Russia is going to get Central Asia and the former Soviet republics presumably uh in including what was formerly the Ukraine. Uh and China is going to get the main mainland Asian neighbors. But uh this [clears throat] is not the really a division of uh regional spheres of influence at all such as occurred at the end of the World War II. uh in the 1945 at Yalta there really was a division of spheres of influence and uh the uh that was the meeting between Roosevelt and Churchill and Stalin but uh the United States is not only going to get Latin America and the Caribbean. Uh the the agreement of the Monroe Doctrine was that America would stay out of Eastern Hemisphere Eurasian affairs. Well, that's not at all what uh Trump in intends. Uh he's saying that Europe and Asia can have to stay away from Latin America. That Russia and Venezuela must Russia and Iran and must uh and China must not invest in Venezuela or even buying its oil for themselves. It has to leave all of this to the United States. So that's sort of a travesty of the Monroe Doctrine. Uh because there's no uh reciprocity. Uh the the US diplomats are maneuvering to control Eurasian affairs. They by ringing the whole region with military bases and trying to engage in regime change and mobilizing other countries. And one of the key uh tells of how absurd this is is in addition to the US, Russia uh and China uh and America that Latin America uh the US wants to add Japan to this group of five that's supposed to uh decide military and diplomatic and trade and financial affairs for the whole rest of the world and you know why it's trying to shoehorn Japan into this regional grouping so that uh it'll have maybe it'll more of a chance of controlling uh the uh the group by getting Japan's vote on its side. You remember a few years ago the United States wanted to add Japan to the UN National Security Council and uh Russia and other countries said haha you just want another automatic vote for the US in the security council. uh Japan doesn't have an independent vote. Well, it's not supposed to have it here either. So, while the uh national security statement said, okay, China gets the and Russia get sphere of influence over Asia. You have the quad. You have the US uh in India, uh Japan, South Korea. Uh this is not part of the US sphere of influence. Japan and South Korea are obviously on the US side against Asia. Not a world, not a word of that in the National Security Council. And uh when Trump says sphere of influence, it really there's only one sphere of influence in the world. And that's uh the whole world is America's sphere of influence. And uh you can see where this is leading. After World War II ended, MacArthur uh used the Japanese uh gang, criminal gangs essentially to uh attack physically and break up uh the socialist groups in Japan that were trying to uh work against Japanese militarism by creating labor oriented socialism. Well, uh the uh the gangs and the US and MacArthur uh ended up uh putting in power the National Democratic Party, the NDP is uh the US surrogate doing uh to Japan what uh uh the British Labor Party's done uh for the US and and Britain and Macron does in France for the United States. So uh Japan sort of sacrificed its future in the 80s by the uh the plaza and the louver accords that ended up bringing the lost decade of uh the 1990s and after that Japan's in been in ever since and because of its willingness to serve the United States. That's the model that the United States wants for Russia and China and all other countries. and uh he's uh his what he's doing in Venezuela uh is pretty much exactly what he's doing against Russia uh trying to block its soil and trying to block it wherever it can which is why I think the whole agree uh so-called agreements over Ukraine are falling apart right now. Uh it it's Trump has a power grab and he he's looking forward to u militarizing it and uh Hegsth seems to be all in favor of it which uh may mean he's on the way out given his unpopularity. Yeah, >> I would also point out that the Monroe Doctrine did not prevent Latin American countries from continuing and in even in many cases developing trade and investment relationships with the Europeans. >> Yeah. >> Yes, there was a definition of a sphere of influence, but that definition is very variable, very maluant, can mean lots of different things. Mr. Trump is trying and the people around him to make it mean much more than it ever did before. So this should be understood to be what? It is a ploy. It is a transparent ploy to get more in the way of a regional domination than they had before while continuing to contest with China and Russia for Europe and Asia and all the rest of those places. It is not it is the apparent recognition which I myself saw it as and I said so on our discussions here. I saw that December 4th document as remarkable because in its obtuse way it admitted the end of the empire but I was uh over hasty there. What I didn't understand and I should have and I see it more clearly now is that yes it was an admission but at the same time it was the assertion that there was a way out of that admission. there was a way around it. So you had the this would be the way you would write a compromise. Some people telling Mr. Trump, look, you've got to take it easy. It's like like it's like Michael's assessment of what the Navy may have told Trump last night before he did what he thought he could do. Well, there are advisors to say, "We've got to take it. we can't manage a global empire. So, they get one part of the speech. But the other ones who say yes, we can, they get their part of the speech. Venezuela is the latter group's part of the speech. war. There is their group saying to the the Chinese who by the way have built one of the largest most expensive naval um shipping ports in Latin America just re recently opened in Peru if I remember uh for for shipping half of Latin America's product to China. That's what it's all for. The port is close to China if you know how the ocean works there. So th this is a contradiction like the performance last night. We're going to have a war. Now we're not going to have a war. Now we're going to leak a war. Now we're going to not leak a Yeah, there's a struggle going on which is understandable. It's part of the decline of an empire. I noticed also that they have allocated $8 billion to Taiwan. It's not just that they did it. It's not just that it's more than they've ever given them before, but look at the timing. You're doing it at the same time that you're threatening war with Venezuela. This is not a a a country that has emitted its global empire is not sustainable. This is a country who's trying to sustain its global empire. Uh and I would also point out which is extremely dangerous which is why I know there is little commentary about it but the Chinese and the Russians to the extent that their navy is in any way involved around Venezuela which I understand it is although I don't know and as a pretty observant reader of the press. You know, I may have missed it, but I I suspect we're not being told too much about what the military support and the economic support Russia and China and possibly others have offered Venezuela. But it does mean that we are once again as we are in Ukraine in a war that is a kind of proxy violence between the Chinese and the bricks on one end and the United States and I was about to say with a G7 but there's not much less left of the G7 on the other side. And this is a very dangerous thing. before World War I, World War I. And remember, World War I was fought by a collection of capitalist colonialist powers, Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and a few others who were bitterly divided, fighting each other in the Middle East, in Africa, all over all over. And they had had a number of war scares and then a minor matter, the assassination, no one knew by whom, of an obscure member of the government in Austria, Archduke Ferland if I remember. So he gets assassinated somewhere in the middle of Europe and all the countries go to war. Well, they didn't go to war because they cared about this assassinated nobleman. I mean, nobody in their right mind would imagine that. They went to war because they had had 20 years of continuous battle among these colonialist giants, each having carved up a piece of the world. Remember the famous meeting in Berlin in 1884 where literally all the leaders of Europe took out large markers and divided a map of Africa in particular who the Germans got their big chunks and and the Belgians got the Congo and and Britain got most of the rest of it and and the Spanish some and and you know just horrific. But we are now in a very similar series of proxy wars, near wars, warlike incidents, you know, and the absurdity of the United States arming an island, you know, a few miles off the shore of China is now being matched by them giving help to Venezuela when the United States is, you know, menacing it. We are we and I mean here the American people are allowing this to unfold and it's very clear who the aggressor is. It's not China and the bricks. Time has shown itself to be on their side. They have grown despite every effort of the United States and the West to stop it for at least 25 years now. One thing after another, it doesn't work. They have learned the lessons. They are self-sufficient now in oil and energy. The the amount they get from Venezuela, they can lose it tomorrow. It will not matter. Their economic growth this year will again be about two and a half to three times what the GDP growth is in the United States. I just read a report yesterday that compares the cost of 1 kilowatt of energy inside China to any producer there. It is 16th one sixth of the cost per kilowatt hour of energy to a producer in the United States. Well, that's why they don't have an inflation in China. The last few years, their rate of growth of prices is under 1%. We have an inflation and we have a terrible problem with our energy prices. Europe's even worse. We're not going to work our way out of this. The the passage of time works for them. So, who's going to upset the apple cart? Who's going to make the mistake as this situation worsens? Well, we have in one government here the willingness to risk unspeakable war to play out this game. And here in Europe, I read, as I had this morning, I read the leadership of France and Britain and Germany as willing to risk a war with Russia as they ever have been to save their political careers because the overwhelming mass of the people don't want a war, will not support a war, do not care enough about whatever they think is going on in Ukraine to risk everything that they would have which such a war would produce. I mean yes there are a few who are who are literally unbalanced the Baltic republics and a couple of others who speak in crazy tones. You know these are people who who have been in political wilderness for a long time and it shows. But the more reasonable, the more balanced. They don't want this. The Europeans at the time before World War I, they didn't want it either. But they worked their way to it by allowing these incidents not to go challenged by a peace movement. And by the way, after World War I was over, the capitalist system, which is what went to war against itself in World War I, suffered the most amazing defeats imaginable. First of all, they lost one whole country, Russia, which had a revolution right in the middle of World War I, and never rejoined the West. Not even now. and they they gave power to the socialist and communist parties in their respective countries that have they have regretted ever since. And something like that happened after World War II. So let me also caution those of you who might be gung-ho about where these wars will lead. Setting aside the possibility of nuclear war, the other kinds of wars have not been good for the capitalism that produces them. And this one, if it happens, won't be either. >> Michael, Michael, from Venezuela to Russia's tankers, you know, is the United States quiet, let's go worst case scenario. Is the United States quietly expanding a global war? Because we've learned, as Richard has mentioned, we've learned about the new package of weapons going to Taiwan, 11.1 billion dollars, the new package, the you know, the largest package so far to Taiwan. What is your take on that? Uh well, Richard has just spelled out what the national security statement means when it says uh that the US uh empire is over and we can't try to run the world. It'll be a division in two regions. It means just what he said, working through proxies in practice. In other words, we can't afford uh any more costs to go to war against Russia in Ukraine. That's just a bottomless sink of money given the corruption and the fact that Ukraine's lost so heavily. Uh but he I think that uh Trump is fed up with Europe. You've seen all of his anti-European statements. Uh and he so essentially when he says giving up the empire, he's talking about Europe's fight uh with Russia. Now uh He's if uh Europe wants to fight with Russia, he says, you know, let it be our proxy. We'll do everything we can to help it, uh we're going to continue to give it the radar guidance and the military guidance of exactly where to bomb Russia, but we're not going to spend any money on it. Uh we're going to have Europe take responsibility for the money. Unfortunately, we have our our puppets there. Mertz, who wants to actually who just uh said he wants to begin drafting Germans again uh into the new Vermacht uh to to fight Russia is if there's going to be a land war uh and Macron who continues to send French mercenaries there and of course Starmer in England. So uh this is using them as proxies. the United States is disengaging from them just as it's trying in in Asia to use Taiwan and Japan and South Korea as its proxies or in Latin America right-wing governments like Bolsiniro who Trump tried to uh uh free from jail for his attempts to overthrow the election. But there's another thing that uh uh [clears throat] is required for this ending of the US control and that's something I think you were getting towards. It means the collapse of international law. It means the replacement of not only international law but all of the principles of the United Nations that were created uh seemingly legally uh after World War II. Uh it's the law of the sea for instance that uh the sea belongs to everyone and it's not nationalized as part of the United States. Trump says that other countries have stolen the Atlantic and Pacific oceans from the United States and it's ours and we're going to take it back. Uh I'm sort of paraphrasing or extending what his thought process is. [clears throat] But it's also climate deals, the Paris agreements uh by countries who are all threatened by the global uh extreme weather, the global warming, the the floods and the droughts that are happening all over. They were trying to decarbonize uh the uh environment so that uh you can prevent this uh climate disaster from uh happening and raising the sea levels and flooding uh the sea coasts all over the world. Well, as uh Trump basically says, well, uh just as we're against uh uh you saying the law of the sea is free to everybody as if it's not our ocean uh that uh you're talking about. So uh with the climate deals, we're against any international agreement uh that prevents us from controlling the world energy trade through our control of oil and deciding who can produce and trade this oil and who are we allowed to block. That's all all blocked. So you have this the uh you had international law of free trade of of most of my favorite favored nation nations of uh free capital movements. all of these moves and all of this sort of ideology uh that was put in place at the end of World War II that seemed to be where civilization was moving towards uh the all governments majority acting together to solve pro common problems in the world from who can use the sea to uh how do we uh prevent some countries from uh polluting the government and hurting others and threat threatening their security uh to the military ideas. Uh yes, there will be national security military for every country but not at the expense of other countries military security. As the Russian president and foreign minister continued to say all of this is an attack saying international law is ended. It's all uh part all subject to uh the US rules-based order that uh basically any [clears throat] agreement or rules government governing international trade uh the usage of fuels uh is uh basically under unique US uh domination and uh the sort of that's the real power grab here that there's really only one sphere of influence that's uh a regional influence and that's America over Latin America. All the all of these other countries that are supposed to have a sphere of influence. When it says a Russian sphere of influence, it means uh let Europe fight Russia. Uh not us. When it says a Chinese sphere of influence, uh, it says, "Well, let China try to do what it can, but we're going to surround it, uh, with the quad countries and with American proxies, especially in Taiwan that we just signed a America just signed an enormous, I think 11 uh, billion dollar arms deal with, uh, to try to counter it. Uh, America is not recognizing any country's sphere of influence except its own. uh which is stay out of Latin America and uh as Richard just pointed out that wasn't the Monroe Doctrine. any country could trade or borrow from other countries. And in fact, right as the Latin American countries beginning in the 1920s, uh won their uh political liberty from their foreign colonizers. uh uh Mexico uh Brazil uh all of uh the Latin American countries went into debt to British bankers primarily and Haiti went into debt to buy its freedom from French bankers. All of these Latin American countries became financial satellites of uh England and uh European uh bankers. America had uh no problem with that, no problem with other trade. America was all in favor of Latin American trade with other countries as long as the profits were all sent to the United States not to uh uh and the United States is the beneficiary of this trade. So basically Trump is saying a sphere of influence cannot be permitted unless the United States is the uh single beneficiary of any economic and balance of payment surpluses that are created by these five regions. That's the double standard of that is u the national security study is supposed to promote. >> Yeah. >> Another if if I could add another de again just enriching the layers of of understanding of what's going on here. You know the United States came out of World War II. It was the dominant economic power. But it wasn't just that it was the US dollar everywhere and the US financed everything and the US provided the the loans, you know, the Marshall Plan and all the rest for the whole rest of the world and dominated world trade. It was also the political domination, the ideological do, you know, the Hollywood produced the movies that everybody looked at, Levi Strauss produced the jeans that everybody learned to wear, blah blah blah. All of that, with one exception, and we're not sure about that, has eventually been overturned. The United States is not the top economic door. We've discussed this now and now Zam and the inf the evidence for it is everywhere and accumulates literally every day. Ditto with the politics you know on on some of the key issues the United States not just loses votes in the United Nations but loses them overwhelmingly. You know, there are votes of a 100 plus countries to five and the United States is one of the five, you know, and Israel is typically there and then little islands in the Pacific. But the rest of the world is no longer go and even the the Europeans slavish towards the US as they continue to be at least the leaders are making statements against the politics of the United States. And I can assure you the mood here. I've only been here a couple of days. You know, the critique of Trump is everywhere between the lines or on the lines in the press and so on. So the political weaponry isn't there. The political position is gone. The economic position is gone. The ideological position is gone. Yeah, the world is not hanging on every fad coming from the United States the way it once did, whether it's in dress or anything else. So, what's left? Here's my point. Military. We haven't yet demonstrated to the world that our military is no longer the overwhelming. for most of the last 30 years when and there were agencies that did this when there were tabulations of how much the major countries of the world spent on the military. The United States was listed not only as number one but as spending more on the military than the next eight or nine countries combined. And those eight or nine included Russia and China. In other words, the United States was as overwhelmingly dominant in the Cold War period militarily as it was economically, politically, and ideologically. Here's how I interpret what Michael said and that phenomena which continues to appear to me to be much more important than it's getting the attention shooting innocent people because they haven't been proven guilty who are sitting in boats in the Caribbean or in the Pacific. By the way, 90 I believe 95 of them or some number like that have been killed. Right? That is a very powerful symbolism of we are going to use what we still have military. We're gonna show We're not gonna rely on what the previous stupid presidents did, which is you have the Navy, you board the ship, you confiscate the drugs, if they're there, you arrest the people involved, and then they go into their country and they get tried. No, no, no. That that didn't work. And so now we knew we use what we have left the fist. We are in a position to do what we look at what let the world beware. You get on the wrong side of us and we are going to be doing this to you too. Okay? This is using the military cuz you don't have anything else anymore you can use. And and there are two outcomes here that are possible. Number one, it will work. you will terrorize a large part of the world by the threat of military action and that's ultimately nuclear military action or you could have both of these of course or you will provoke the rest of the world to see you as the number one danger to world peace and to organize themselves economically, politically to defeat you. And here, let me leave you with a observation. We have hollowed out our manufacturing. We cannot go it alone. And if the rest of the world were to view us as a rogue nation prepared to threaten with milit, there will be reactions. Ask yourself if you want to ask yourself the question, if Mr. Trump's advisors who want war in Venezuela have their way and the United States attacks lands troops and all of that sort of thing. It's not just that the Russians and Chinese may have some surprises for them in Venezuela. It's that they of course can take retaliatory steps in all kinds of ways. We're going to perhaps start hearing again about rare earths and all kinds of other things they could do. And there we see again the road to war laid out right in front of us but dependent on the decisions being made literally as we talk. >> Well, Richard's defined the problem. America's hitherto dominant economic position no longer exists. It's gone. So, how can the United States maintain its living standards without industry, with de-industrialization, and having become a debtor country, not the world's main creditor with most of the world's gold uh and financial claims on other countries? Well, the answer Richards just pointed out, other countries uh h have to begin paying for the military wars that the United States waged before. And part of their paying forward is still going to be paying I think the American military-industrial complex. these countries uh Europe and others are supposed to buy American arms because despite the fact that Germany's trying to mount its travesty of military Keynesianism of its own arms makers, the fact is without Russian energy uh prices and low cost of production, it really can't compete with with other countries. uh other countries are going to have to provide the benefits to the United States to subsidize its de-industrialization to subsidize its enormous federal budget deficits that are being financed largely uh it had been hoped by other countries holding treasury securities. Uh is there foreign uh foreign monetary reserves? uh all all of this is that somehow the United States is going to run the policies of other countries to make sure that it's all centered on the United States as if it's the center of a spider's web that's all extending out and uh the question is are other countries going to say uh we want our economic surplus for itself just like Venezuela wanted its uh natural resources and the natural resource rents for uh itself. Uh the United States has one thing to offer these countries. It's not uh any longer industrial exports. It's not loans. It's the agreement not to bomb them and not to terrorize them and not to have regime change governments like the Maidan massacre uh in Ukraine. uh and uh apart from the ability of the United States to create chaos in other countries as I think we've discussed in the last show uh the United States really has nothing to offer. So what do why is it that other countries will not act in their own economic self-interest and say uh we're creating the economic surplus now the e the surplus should be for itself. Uh We want to make our own profits from our exports. Why shouldn't we trade with the most rapidly growing economies in the world, China, Russia, and other East Asian countries, in order to uh trade with a shrinking domestic economy, the United States, whose GDP is mainly financial and ronier in uh in character, real estate, finance, uh health insurance, and other insurance uh companies. uh these are not things that America can't offer other countries the uh profits from its uh rontier sector economic rent seeeking because this isn't really a product and without that all America has is the ability to uh exploit by by threats it has nothing positive to offer other countries except somehow it's had the personal loyalty of you know are uh uh the three Europeans we mentioned uh Macron and Merittz and Starmer and the you have I think today there's a meeting in Europe it may be happening while we're talking I think 10 European countries want to grab uh Russia's saving confiscate Russia's uh monetary savings in Europe eight countries are opposing this the uh Trump and the national security statement said he wants at least four countries to withdraw from the European Union. Italy, Hungary, Czech Republic, uh, and some others. Well, it looks like many more countries are now trying to break away from the EU. And breaking away from the EU leadership which are puppets of NATO means breaking away from the uh American vehicle for controlling other countries European policy uh by its proxies uh NATO and the EU are American proxies to control countries and so when you talk about countries uh acting in their own self-interest that mean that entails freeing themselves from uh NATO, the EU, and all of these uh proxy governments that America has put in place. >> You know, it's it's tribute. When Vander Lion makes the deal with Trump, he offers to lower tariffs. Just lower them. Not not remove lower them. And in return, the Europeans must pay tribute. They must buy liqufied natural gas from the United States at a price they cannot afford and they must invest $700 billion of their surplus here in the American economy. absolutely extraordinary and that but that's a model. You're going to get tribute like Rome at the end got tribute from all the people who rebelled against Rome because they didn't want to continue to have to pay the tribute. You know, the United States is in a very dangerous situation and it is taking all the steps that go with this. You know, it it's its attempt to break out of the decline of its empire by an activity designed to be symbolically a break, but to when you look at the actual consequences, make their dilemma worse. When you break away from the climate agreement, look what the next step is. I'm jumping over a few. But the next step was the announcement yesterday by the Ford Motor Company that it's abandoning its electric vehicle to it. It invested tens of billions of dollars in that all thrown away. They're going back to just producing fossil fuel. But the whole rest of the world is going in the direction of the electric vehicle. Ford is giving up because the Chinese have outproduced them, out competed them, make the best and the cheapest electric vehicles already. So they quit. So that makes the United States even more dependent on fossil fuel and therefore more crucial to the global warming that comes from generating fossil fu burning fossil fuel. It's like for having the world worry about the narcotics trade and not remember that the United States is the single largest market for the narcotics trade in the world. You're going to you're going to concentrate here one dependency after another in the name of independency. And I I think what you're seeing is just a desperate effort. Even Venezuela, if you're going to commit to to to oil and gas, Yeah. then it becomes sensible to want to grab Venezuela's oil and gas because unlike the Middle East or Nigeria, it's in the Western Hemisphere. I mean, it's not a subtle kind of thinking, but here you go again using your military because you can't get it done any other way. And this this is a to think that the only message the rest of the world gets is conform is to make a terrible mistake. The Chinese have shown for the last 30 years that their response is to become self-sufficient to break away from dependency on the United States for anything. And there I want to remind everyone after World War II in my profession economics in the universities the single most popular subfield was called economic development and most of the young people who went into the field ended up they out of good intentions helping the poor of the world develop you study you know agrarian economies and you discuss economies dependent on mining and and how how to strategize to get out of their horrible poverty and into the modern world by which was meant North America, Western Europe and Japan. All right, here we are 70 years into economic development. The one country that got no help from the west towards its economic development was China and with it Russia and that North Korea. All the rest got all kinds of a Marshall plan and aid of one foreign aid of one kind or they and they got delegations. Many of my classmates went on trips to these countries to give them advice to teach. Who has succeeded? Russia, China, and North Korea. Who hasn't? All the rest of them. That was what the West's help did for them. They're not unaware of this. They may not say it. They know it. They have to know what in the world enabled the Chinese in their way and even the Russians in their way to acquire the power, the the wealth and the independence that they would love to have but cannot even aspire to in the current situation. These are all ways in which the isolation of the United States is another way to understand what we are living through. >> Yeah. I want to make one comment on Richard's comment about tribute. Uh Japan pays uh has promised to pay 550 billion in investing and loans to the United States. South Korea 350 billion. Europe the 200 billion. But the way to oppose the US tribute taking from the rest of the world means isolating these countries and Europe's ability to pay tribute to the United States. If the source of America's ability to uh block economic development in these other countries is the tribute that it now gets from its satellites abroad, not at home. Then you want to isolate not simply the United States economy but those economies that have willingly become satellites of the United States agreeing to pay the their uh entire balance of payment surplus and economic and trade surplus to the United States as tribute for the United States not pushing their unpopular regime chain regimes out of power. So that's an interesting extension of the geopolitics of other countries becoming independent. Obviously uh I love what uh Richard said about uh the most popular courses being economic development courses when I was in uh school in the 1960s that was indeed the case. He's absolutely right. They're uh e what they considered to be economic development uh is what uh other countries called underdevelopment. Uh, and to me it was a distorted uh, development. >> Yeah. Richard, do you want to add something before wrapping up? >> I just want to recognized that I had a teacher, the only teacher in my graduate economics education who had it right and who told us way back then exactly what we would see and which we have now seen. And some of you may know his name. His name was Paul Ban. He was a professor of economics at Stanford uh University and I it was the last year of his life unfortunately but I I was able to be his student then and that he he wrote a book called the political economy of growth where he talked exactly about what I'm mentioning and it gave us the clue as to why we could then understand the ability of China to make the economic growth that was discussed but never achieved. D in the western half of the world. >> Yeah. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael. Great pleasure as always. >> Happy holidays, by the way. >> Happy holidays. Yeah. Merry Christmas. Bye. Bye. Bye. >> Bye.