Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, October 2nd, 2025 and our friends Richard Wolf and Michael Hodson join us today. Welcome Richard and Michael. >> Good to be back. Michael, let's start with you and we had we were talking about the meeting that Pete Hexet urgent meeting that Pete Hexit had with generals and admirals and they were talking about many issues and you know the foreign policy domestic policy but the main issue right now is the way that the United States sees the conflicts in Ukraine and in the Middle East. one of them Donald Trump two times he said that the problem Russia is a paper tiger then he came out and said no I didn't mean that and he again you know repeating the same sort of rhetoric that Russia is a paper tiger do you think that we are getting closer to a nuclear war with this sort of attitude because these countries don't know what is in the mind of Donald Trump >> I think Trump and the deep state have already decided on nuclear war. Uh because last week uh we described all the economic reasons why uh Trump is desperate. He's desperate to maintain the US and NATO control of the world. And it's all backfiring. Just in the last day or two, you've had uh Korea saying, "We're not going to even begin to talk about investing in the United States. We can't afford it. it would mean uh a destruction of the Korean economy. The Japanese said, "All right, we can't talk about that either." Uh in Europe, even they're refusing to go along with it. Uh so I I think that uh Trump and the US is saying, "How are we going to lock in our control?" Well, you mentioned Ukraine. I think that the uh Europe is uh and Ukraine now that they're bombing uh Russian refineries and bombing Russian uh energy generation just like uh Russia had been bombing that of Ukraine. They're they're going to say we're going to keep upping the scale, upping the scale, upping the scale until finally you won't have any choice but to uh resist. and uh your guests and uh commentators all over the internet say that the Russian population and uh what's called the right-wing, meaning the nationalistic wing, uh uh are saying we we've got to respond because at some point we're going to have to respond and we might as well respond earlier instead of later after they've blown up more of our refineries and more more of our uh energy production. So I think the point is coming very near that especially now that Estonia has seized the Russian oil tanker this means essentially uh a one escalation after another and I think they've decided on we're going to keep upping the rate the destabilization until there's war especially because the army believes and Trump believes that if they can tie up Russia in Ukraine then Russia will be unable to help Iran defend it against what is a week or two away Israel's attack and America's attack uh on on Iran uh which is going to result in just the conflation of the near east and I made a list uh that we talked about earlier of all the you know what America is trying to do to lock in its position oil and uh uh the dollar. But it occurs to me that uh the Trump and his adviserss must know that none of these are going to work. And I think that Trump has his own agenda. And uh you and I talked about that earlier. He his narcissistic drive to make himself famous. And I think he's seen there's one way in which he can be the most famous person in history. He can be the man who blew up civilization. That's more important than Jesus, more important than Moses. All he has to do is start an atomic war. And when the debt the uh dust settles and evolution starts all over again, uh the surviving humanity, wherever it is, is going to uh write a history and say, "How did all this begin? How did the world blow up?" And they'll say, "Somebody named Donald Trump." That's his dream. A narcissist cannot resist the temptation to be the most important famous person in all of history. And who's to stop him? Historians are going to marvel at how he's been able to make, you know, uh rule with such an uh iron hand. And uh be before we talk about we get into the economics uh I want to say uh a lot of people have mentioned Trump's desire to be a Roman empire like Caligula and Calig uh Caligula got famous for uh having such control over the Senate uh that he nominated his horse inatus to be the senator. uh the word incite tous means from the English word incight to to go on and uh the today's uh you could say that what Trump has done is appoint more than a horse he's appointed a whole stable of cabinet ministers and uh uh the the people who are running the country that are the human equivalent of Caligula 's horse. Uh you've you've you've seen uh Hegs speech before the army yesterday and what that did. You could go right down the line uh to the beauty contest winners uh who uh and Fox News broadcasters who appointed administrators. Uh it's uh it's the embodiment of total uh yesmen total people totally under his control. Nobody can stop him. And uh he'll have people um the the military advisers such as Keith Kellogg, uh the the Netanyahu's adviserss, uh you can go right down the the line, the neocons, it's uh the whole whatever we're going to talk about for the rest of the uh this hour is going to be the it's not there's nothing that the United States can do to reverse the loss of the fact that the US century uh let's say 1925 to 2025 is over and the the west dominance is over. The reaction of Trump is not only chaos but just bring the whole thing down. >> Go ahead. >> Okay. Well, maybe this time Michael and I can disagree a little bit and see how how that evolves as a uh as a program. I understand what Michael is saying. Is that a possible place where we are? Is that a possible direction that we could take? Absolutely. I am not I'm not going to argue that it isn't. But I am going to argue that when societies find themselves in the kind of dead end that I think we are now in and pretty much the same reasoning gets me to that that Michael has and that we've discussed on this program for quite a while now. Another trajectory out of it besides the one that that Michael just outlined is a recognition that the game is over and that what has to happen now is a sane negotiation for the least difficult accommodation of what is happening and is going to happen no matter what we do. Precisely because the alternative is what Michael just laid out. And that alternative is so horrible and so selfdestructive that we'll avoid it. And I take a certain comfort from knowing that whatever was in the mind of Adolf Hitler or Benito Mussolini or Franchesco Franco that didn't come to pass either. Those projects collapsed and they mostly collapsed because they overreached what they thought they could achieve and thereby produced the backlash that eventually overwhelmed them and and you know erased them at least for a while from from history. Okay. Well, let let me spell out very briefly uh what I think. Um the contradictions of Mr. Trump's economic policy are now reaching a level of absurdity. Not that they weren't there already before, but they are now coming to the foreground of people's awareness. Even the media that support Trump are reporting what? Well, let's see. The fundamental rationale economically of Mr. Trump's every economic policy has been the idea that he's going to make America great again by bringing back jobs. And he's made it quite clear that he's going uh you know the tariff, right? Because you have to pay a fee to access uh selling into the US market. We hope to see companies coming back inside the United States because that will be a way for them to escape the tariff. They won't have to pay a tariff. If they sell in Chicago what they make in New Jersey, there's no tariff. If they sell in Chicago what they make in China, there is a tariff, etc., etc., etc. So, we're going to make America great again by reindustrialization. They even have a word they like those people reshoring, bringing back to our shore what was taken to the other shore. Okay, now let's take a look at that. How that's working. Here we go. Number one, is there a flood of jobs coming back? Absolutely not. There's no such statistic. Are there some companies coming back? Yes, of course. But most of them have to do with high-tech. They're going to California, Silicon Valley, and they the one thing they don't have is a lot of jobs because they are capital intensive. They're full of computers. They're full of, you know, all of that material that they need. And the number of people are highly educated, highly trained, and few in number. That's not a solution to the unemployment problem. And how do we know that? Because if you look at the last year, all of the original numbers of jobs have been adjusted in subsequent months downward, culminating in the latest numbers, which indicate no growth at all. In fact, a decline of 32,000 jobs uh in the latest reporting period. So, no jobs. Okay. Why? Well, here's the here come the contradictions. Because almost everything else Mr. Trump is doing is an encouragement for CEOs around the world not to come here. I mean, let's go. The government is shut down. Hello. That's a clue. Don't go there. You do. If you're a business person, you don't locate. You don't spend millions of dollars moving a factory or an office, lose a year in the whole adjustment in order to go to a place where the lo the two major parties can't keep the government functioning. Their divisions and their hostilities are so deep. As if that weren't enough, the military are discussing invading their own country. The vice president looks forward to all the major cities being occupied. Well, what why would you move to a country contemplating that? That's 800 ways you could make a big big mistake. You're not going to do that. You're not going to be the vice president in charge of location who will go down in history as having been moronic enough in the face of what I just said to move into the United States. But I'm not done. According to the financial press, we're on the precipice of a stagflationary period, a mixture of low-level economics, which the unemployment numbers I just mentioned reinforce, and an untamed inflation. The current inflation rate is 3%. If we are in a great struggle with China, let me let everyone know the official inflation rate in China now is minus 0.4%. They don't have any inflation. They have a deflation. United States has an inflation of 3%. That alone will enable the Chinese to out compete the United States each year that it continues. Forget tariffs. Forget even exchange rates. Before you even look at those, look at the disparity. By the way, this is not new. The the Chinese have not, in case you're not familiar with the statistics, it's not recent that they've had no inflation. They've kept inflation under control in a remarkable way. That's why you haven't heard about inflation in China because it's not a bad number that the media can talk about. Keep that in mind when you read that in Russia is on its knees. It's economy. If you cherrypick statistics in any country, including the United States, if I want to make a case, the United States is in good shape, I can pick six statistics that make that happen. If I want to show the United States is in trouble, I can pick six different statistics and make that case. Any analyst who has a brain knows that the trick of analysis is not the cherry-picking, which an infant can do. It's the balancing. How do you reach a a judgment that takes into account the different statistics, some of which are always pointing up and others of which are pointing down. Really is like a doctor uh measuring your body and all of its functions as well. All right. The Chinese are what? They're not just winning the economic race. It isn't enough anymore to simply say look at the GDP China and the bricks now a much larger economic unit than United States in the G7 and that's a real issue but we're now beginning to see the chickens coming home. We're seeing the effects, the consequences. Over the last 20 years, 25 years, the Chinese have made a series of very important investments in Venezuela. They are not in a position, neither in Venezuela nor in any of the other countries that they have invested to permit the United States to willy-nilly overthrow a government in order then to what? Wipe out the Chinese. No, no, that isn't going to happen anymore. That's what used to happen in the old colonial world. Yes. But not now. So when the United States in violation of everything I understand to be the law wantingly kills I don't know 25 people by now in several boats on the outskirts of Venezuela. No arrest, no investigation, no trial, no jury, no judge, no appeal. murder on the spot with statements about Venezuela being punished for its drug activities. Everyone who knows anything about the drug trade knows that the bulk of the drug grave happens on the Pacific Ocean side of the Western Hemisphere, not on the Atlantic side. What comes from the Atlantic through the Caribbean is small potatoes. If you're interested in inhibiting drugs, Venezuela isn't your target. And so the Chinese Here we go now. The Chinese Navy is big time in Venezuela. What does that mean? It means exactly what you think it means. you're not going to do there. You can bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bravado all you want. You can assemble your uh generals in a sweaty room. Doesn't change. Is the United States, if Michael is right, is it about to work with Israel to attack Iran and Venezuela while the Gaza thing is unresolved and the Ukraine war is being won by Russia? Really, you know what that would be? Overreach. It would be exactly what brought to an end Hitler Mussolini and Francesco Franco. And I bet you despite their clownishness among Mr. Trump's advisors, there are those who may tell him that as well. And if not, well, we can do it. Go ahead, Michael. Your your mic is mute. You're muted. >> Okay. >> Yeah. >> Uh I think that to Trump, the drive for US unipolar control can't be over in his mind. He can't acknowledge it because that would mean he's a loser. And uh he's he's that that is what makes him so desperate. He's desperately lashing out uh in a strategy that both Richard and I have described in the last few weeks can't work for reasons that uh we've described. Uh Richard used the word overreach. His tariffs were an overreach. His military expansion on a multiffront war is overreach. Uh- Richard uh started by saying he hopes that this is going to frame uh Trump's creating of a more realistic uh resolution of how America can accept its lost place in the world now that the American century is over and uh how he can uh realistically act in a way that is not going to self-destructively just drive other countries further away and consolidate America's self uh isolation economically. Well, we discussed before how Trump can't res reshore industry because his tariffs have prevented that. The tariffs have made America too high cost on steel and aluminum on so many uh things that America has been importing. Uh the so what is Trump going to do to try to compensate for the fact that the that other countries have already in the last few days rejected the idea of relocating their industry in the United States. They can't afford it. And uh Trump is insisting that the United States gets to keep the profits on this industry. It means any foreign investment in the US industry is in danger of being lost. So uh what's the problem? Well, I've emphasized before oil and the US dollar are the key to the US hedgeimonyy and oil is I think absolutely key. Uh we Trump's attack on Venezuela is to grab its oil and not only grab its oil to make money for the American companies that would take over, but to be able to prevent other countries from importing oil from Venezuela or refining uh Venezuelan oil to sell. Same thing with Argentina. Why did Trump make the 20 billion dollar loan to Argentina that uh there is zero chance of Argentina being able to repay for reasons that I'll get into. Uh America wants two things from Argentina. Number one, control of its still stateowned oil industry. same thing as Venezuela, take over its oil industry and to make a military base in Terara del Fuego, the south tip of uh South America that controls not only the route around South America from the Atlantic to the Pacific and back, but control over Antarctica. uh and the Malay uh government uh yesterday gave the uh America permission to start the military bases there uh bypassing all congressional uh approval in Argentina and that's created a crisis. So you can see what's happened. Uh yesterday the Financial Times had a very clear article on the fact that how will America ever get this $20 billion back? The only way that it can do it is if the IMF makes yet another loan to Argentina, a losing loan, because uh the $20 million is going to be spent right away by Malay to support the Argentine peso so that the wealthiest classes in Argentina can move their money out of Argentine and pesos into the dollar or gold or something else uh without at the current price ratio, not a devaluation uh price that they'd have to get less dollars or less gold for. So, this money is going to be spent right away. And when Malay loses the elections uh in the next week or two, then Argentina is going to have this $20 billion additional debt. I think Trump knows that the debt can't be repaid. And like many creditors uh throughout history, he doesn't want the debt to be repaid. He said, "You don't have the money to repay. Give us your oil industry. Give us your land in uh in the south. Uh give us that." It's finance is in Trump's idea still a hope for the new colonialism. Uh you're also having Trump break with the whole rest of the world on global warming. What is he trying to do? Well, much as he's trying to prevent other countries from meeting their energy needs from oil that the US doesn't control, he's trying to prevent other countries from meeting their energy needs by solar power, not to mention wind power or atomic power. That he's insisting that other countries uh rely entirely on o. And uh yesterday uh Trump increased subsidies uh for uh and the selloff of huge coal lamps saying not only is oil the fuel of America's future but coal is the uh is the fuel of America's future. This uh increases the greatest threat to all the rest of the world's economy in the form of global warming that along with the military threat is an existential threat. And uh other countries I think have to realize that you know why is Trump so uh refusing to acknowledge global warming. It's because global warming is a threat to America's ability to turn off their energy, turn off their electricity, a turn turn off to deny them of power just uh for the same reason that it blew up uh Russia's North Sea pipeline to Europe. So you have all this comes down to the support for the dollar and uh that's why Trump has uh also announced in the last uh week or so he wants to increase uh cryptocurrency especially the stable coin that all of the stable coin uh proceeds uh crypto uh stable coin are going to be invested in US treasury securities. So this is somehow going to he believes that this Fed for stable coins is going to be able to finance the Treasury's deficit caused by his tax cuts on for the wealthy classes, his donor class, and for the shrinking economy that's continuing to shrink. So all of these uh these policies that Trump is trying to do to uh say yes we can live with the existing world situation and we can still maintain our unipower control by uh reshoring our industry by controlling oil uh controlling uh agricultural uh exports the food supply. Well, that hasn't worked as you see with the soybean market. All all of the ideas of how to somehow hold on to America's uh ability to make other countries pay tribute to the United States by investing here and reshoring their own industry out of their countries into the United States by buying uh depending on US liqufied natural gas instead of oil. by not obtaining oil from uh Venezuela, Argentina, Russia or or Iran. All of these are absolutely destined to fail. And the only way that I can see him ultimately responding is by war to say that if if I can't have it my way, it's my way or no way. That that's my worry of the mindset of Trump and the neocons behind him. Again, let I understand the direction Michael is pointing to. I understand the logic. Uh it's a compelling logic. It's clear. Uh let me only comment by talking about an alternative direction these same developments might lead to. And here's what I focus on. I'm noticing, and I'm sure you guys have too, but I I'm noticing something very interesting happening pretty much at the same time in the United States as in Europe, Western Europe, uh, Central and Western Europe. And and here's what I notice. An emphasis on cutting back government social programs. A recognition that whatever the 20th century required in the way of providing education and medical care and old age pensions and social infrastructure. All of that is a luxury we can quote unquote we the royal we can no longer afford. Why? Well, the is we're threatened by Russia. That's the that's one part of the story. Or now we're threatened by China. Okay, that's a very useful. We are in danger and and so this is something endangering all of us and therefore we must all of us sacrifice. And you know that when when the people who run these societies talk about all of us sacrificing, they always exempt from the all of us the rich and the powerful who will not be hurt. Well, if you're going to rearm, if you're going to spend a fortune, and let's remember, if you look at the American budget, everything is being cut back except the military and the new army called ICE. All right. Now, let's take a look at Europe. Same thing. The leaders Mcron, Starmer, Mertz are all telling their people. Mr. Mertz, remarkable. If you read his speeches, it he he simply says, "We are in danger. The Russians are threatening. We are going to build up our military and other things will no longer be available." So, no mystery from Mr. M. By the way, his his popularity is dropping like a stone. And I'm going to come back to that. Mr. Starmer and Mr. Mcronone, their popularity isn't dropping like a stone because it's already at the bottom of the barrel because of what they've said and they haven't hardly gotten going. So last piece of evidence, you'll notice bizarre recognition by these leaders given what their plan is that there's going to be popular resistance. They see it in their polling numbers, which are awful. They see it in the collapse of the political middle in their countries as left-wing and right-wing extremes become relatively stronger. And then we have Mr. Starmer who's literally, you know, circling the poll and you know which poll I speak of uh in his political career which has been a descent from unbelievable heights. the last election to a to a a spectacular crash. You know what his new idea is? He wants to run on identification cards for all British citizens so that the government can keep better track of in the middle of this turmoil. He's going to spend a fortune of money to be able to control and supervise and survey his own people. The French already have had for many years a dontit which functions that way in France. And Germany is is you know busily banning the extreme political right as a preface to trying to pull the same stunt if the left gets going in Germany the way it already has in France. if the Germans copy the French in the unification of their left parties and in their street actions. So what are we seeing? We're seeing this system aware of the very conversations in their language parallel to what we're doing here. Getting ready to have the fight. getting ready to squash what is the real danger cuz they don't want that war that Michael is talking about. They understand what it might cost them. So they would hope that maybe they can finesse this crisis moment in the way that a capitalist society would be expected to try to do it. By squashing its own working class by taking away enough wealth that they can accommodate the rising Chinese. What option do they have other than nuclear war? They could accommodate the Chinese because they could save their own privilege and their own wealth by ripping off their own people. Knowing them, knowing the courage they don't have, I think there's a good bet that that's what they're going to try to do. And then the issue is, will the work, which is always the issue, right? Will the working class of this country and of Europe permit this to be done? Will they permit their standard of living to be eroded as is happening here? Will they admit the army of their own country that their taxes pay for be used to occupy the cities that provide most of the taxes to pay for it? or will the absurdity of this enable a different politics? >> Richard, what you're describing uh by the US and Europe uh is the class war. It it's really taking the shape of a fight against civilization at least the fight against where all of us have defined the trajectory that we thought civilization was moving in. rising productivity that would be more widely spread to uplift uh living standards and in the process productivity in uh in and overall growth and all of that is being sacrificed with the precise class war that uh you've just mentioned when uh this morning's uh newspapers reported where Trump's budget cuts were. The largest budget cuts were going to be in education. uh followed by uh medical care. Well, these are the two things that the uh civilization was supposed to provide by the state by a state that was uh created and by taking it out of the hands of a hereditary landlord and aristocracy and putting it in the hands of a a an economy presumably democratic. that or at least administered socialist state that would increase education, productivity, health care and have rising growth. All of that is being uh countered by Starmer uh with his new inquisition is what you've described uh merits and uh and and Macron and the result is that uh I think you're having two things that are going together right now and that's very suggestive uh what you said. Uh tomorrow, President Putin of Russia is going to address the Valdi Club and that's where he outlines what is Russia going to do with all of this confrontation that's taking place. Well, at last year's meeting, he called NATO a blatant anacronism. Well, that's true. uh and uh but the United States at least under Trump and the neocons are trying to say well it may be an anacronism but we're going to re restore the past to make the anacronism great again uh perpetual permanent never ending and so what this has created two crises we've been talking so far about the uh geopolitical isolation of the west the United States and Europe from the rest of the world that is uh not uh engaging in this uh militarist so financialized replacing industrial socialism and industrial capitalism with finance capitalism. It's it it's breaking away from colonialism but also from the residue of colonialism, foreign debt and client oligarchies that the western rent extraction uh governments have uh installed. But uh all of this is a crisis of finance capitalism and capitalism itself as a distortion of what people thought would be industrial capitalism evolving into socialism and just what you described as what uh we're all for so that America and Europe could be just as successful as China for instance. And uh you have the uh a rontier economy here u that is using a kind of Ponzi scheme financial scheme led by the Federal Reserve to uh just sort of let's just uh give banks enough money to give the population an ability to buy real estate on credit, buy stocks and bonds and credit. We're going to continue to make to enrich the stockholders, the bond holders, and this is the 10% of the population uh against the rest of the population, and then somehow we'll be able to move all our money somewhere. Well, the this is part of the libertarian attack on government. And whatever authority government loses under this uh attack of of uh uh of of social this wealth of not only has Trump dismantled social spending, he's dismantled the departments of the government that are regulating and protecting consumers, abolishing the Consumer Financial Protection Agency, abolishing the uh Environmental Protection Agency, all of the checks and balances that were put in place to prevent predatory uh corporate industry from impoverishing society are being dismantled. And so this uh inter this breakaway from the west uh western way of doing things is not only a breakaway from this neoliberal financialization and rontier capitalism. It's also uh a it has to involve a breakaway from the uh class war. It's the residue of a an anti- labor oligarchy in Argentina, for instance, uh and the places that we're describing throughout the world, just as the United States. This is why it's a civilizational crisis that we're going through right now. Not only a military crisis, will there be a a world war? Not only an environmental crisis of global warming, but really uh what is going to be the structure of government? Is it going to rule for the 1% or for the economy as a whole? The 1% wants to get rich by indebting and impoverishing the economy with austerity paid to itself. Uh that's uh that's the the US and European uh alternative to uh the what you what used to be the definition of civilization. And the question is uh will the BRICS countries be able to recognize this class war uh class relationship aspect to the international break that's occurring? >> Well, I think the contradict again I think the contradiction is becoming very painful for libertarians. Not that I care. In other words, what you're watching is a consolidation of government power used in the in the civil society on a scale that must make a good number of them quit. I mean, are you kidding? You champion Mr. Trump and he is consolidating a destructive government power the likes of which you you you imagined as some of them are saying only existed in your caricature of socialism. I mean let let's be really clear in the recent speech Mr. Trump gave to the UN. I believe it was there or if not to some other audience. He equated three things as being the three goals he has to defeat those that are anti-american, anti- capitalist, and anti-Christian. So those are the enemies within that he then asked the military to go deal with. Okay. Uh for a libertarian that's not an appropriate thing for a government to be doing any of those things because that requires if you if you mean it. It requires things like sending troops into cities. not typically a big item on libertarian agendas. I never saw it there. You'd have to attribute it to them as either unconscious or that they are all, you know, congenital liars. So, it turns out that for Mr. Trump to try to do what we're talking about here, he has to violate the libertarian commitments. Okay? That is called an internal contradiction to what he's trying to do. You can't look, you can use the government that way, but you're going to lose a lot of libertarians. Now, that may not matter, but there's other people you're going to lose. To attack the cities that they keep mentioning is to attack Democrats. And that wasn't a libertarian idea either. that the way you do the Republican versus Democrat is you send troops if you have the presidency into the cities controlled by the other party. A president which in the event of a democratic president is going to come home to roost in very painful ways in this society. I don't think they have an they don't have a clue in the world when Mr. Trump says, "I won't let Mani run New York City in the event that Mani wins." He is in his usual way with bluster recognizing half of the contradiction. Mani's victory depends on Mr. Trump. It is an effect of Mr. Trump. I don't want to take away in any way from the really brilliant campaign that Mandani has run to his credit very smart, very careful, very effective. But it he I'm sure if he were sitting here would admit and whether he does or not, I'm going to assert that his campaign is running against Trump as I would advise him to do. I live here in New York City. I can assure you the city of New York is overwhelmingly hostile to Mr. Trump. And one of the reasons Eric Adams had to drop out. The sitting mayor comes in fourth in every poll out of four. He he doesn't do as well as the Republican Mr. SWA. and he has the same chance of becoming mayor that Michael and I do, that is to say, none. So, what do we have? We have Mr. Cuomo as the Trump standin. And things are going so badly that Trump, who wanted at first to run against uh that Cuomo, who wanted to run against Trump, is now half running with him because it's so hopeless for him. Well, Mr. Trump has produced Mr. Trump is now and look, he could try in the first few months. It's all inherited. Now that's over. The horrible employment number, that's Mr. Trump. Your great program to bring jobs back is an enormous failure. Oh, of course he'll blame everything he can think of on somebody else. But we have the easy game. It's his fault. Mandani is his fault. The growing socialist presence in in many cities across the country, that's his fault. The extreme rightwing, that's his fault. He's enabling all of that. He's encourage he is producing civil conflict which may explode. And if it does, I am very confident that an enormous number of voters in the United States, if it comes to that in the next six months, will blame him. And if he doesn't understand that, oh boy, is he going to be in trouble, >> Richard. Uh, my definition, my understanding of libertarianism is the diametric opposite of yours. Libertarianism was created as a centralized uh police state, basically a centralized power. It began with the Austrian school of individualism as an attack on classical economics and essentially on socialism and the fights in going on in armed fights in in Vienna. Uh libertarianism is an uh wants to get rid of government. It it has created a narrative of economic history of how all of economic civilization could have existed without any role for government regulatory a agencies without any ability of the government to interfere with private enterprise and uh the uh if you dismantle the power of government uh where who is going to be doing the planning and resource allocation of the economy Wall Wall Street libertarian is has always been uh uh defense of Wall Street, not the government. Control of wealth and the rich, not government. Uh a absolute blockage of any attempts by government to interfere with the market by taxing the rich more. interfering by providing free medical care and education and not leaving this to the free market to uh make people go into a lifetime of debt to get an education uh or med medical care. Libertarianism is in a word fascism from the very outset that was what it is and that requires a police state to enforce. Libertarianism is the doctrine of the police state to free the market from the socialists. And uh I'm glad you mentioned uh Mandami in New York. Uh yesterday again, maybe the day before, Trump says uh he is going to uh uh now that there's a government shutdown that occurred yesterday to begin with, he said, "We're going to begin firing government employees." And I'm going to concentrate on states that have voted Democratic. We're going to fire Democratic uh uh state employees in New York, Massachusetts, California, uh Illinois. He's singled out where he's going to dismantle government. Well, you can imagine what this going is going to do. This is going to increase poverty, crime, distress, foreclosures, ICE. So that's why he's moving not only ICE but as we you you were pointing out the army into these cities to enforce uh to an army not to engage in police work uh to prevent crime but an army to uh fight it in the ways that armies do. Um, and the the other point you made, the first point you made was mentioning Christianity, and I'm glad you mentioned it because we haven't been discussing it before, but it's very important to uh President Putin for President Putin and for uh much of the world uh their idea of Christianity is the what's left of the original Christianity, Eastern Orthodoxy, the Greek and Russian Orthodox church. Uh Putin and uh the Russian speakers continually talk about the attack by Roman Catholicism starting in the 11th century to create the crusades to destroy Bzantium, the Byzantine Empire to destroy the uh the Eastern Orthodox Church, to mount the Crusades, to fight and weaken and and loot Constantinople and uh prevent it from having the resources to defend uh itself against the Turkish invasions uh that have followed. All of this history of the Crusades and the intolerance of the Roman uh Catholic religion in comparison to the tolerance of Eastern Orthodox religion at the time. All of this is a living history uh to Russia and the rest. And it's that uh that that the crusades and the fight of uh the western Christian church to destroy what's left of the original Christianity and the Orthodox church is uh the dress rehearsal for all of the current and the the narrative context for all of the fight between uh western to decadence to Putin and the survival of a more uh I won't say socialist society but his idea of a Christian society of mutual aid of support of tolerance uh you could call it a uniolar uh domestic society as well as uh unipolar international society all of that uh has a religious foundation uh in Russia uh very similar to China's foundation in socialism and uh the and long before that in Confucianism we're really dealing with not only an uh predatory economic uh mentality of the west these are the the 90 the global majority but a religious and ethical and social social mentality uh that's at stake here and America is not going to talk about uh the the crusade es and intolerance and uh the characteristics of this cultural uh shift but uh believe me in Russia and China that's what they're talking about >> I want to if I could if there's time ne say a few words about the libertism >> think of it this way with the irony the libertarians have been so frustrated for most of the last century particularly with the rise of Keynesian economics when they had to confront a social movement largely successful that said that if you leave capitalism to the private enterprise you get the great depression. And so you need government intervention, the government needs to have a fiscal policy. The government needs to have a monetary policy. It has to make up for the demand that is insufficient in the private economy by spending deficits if it needs to. It has to manipulate the monetary system, quantity of money, interest rate and so on in order to manage uh capitalism which if you don't manage it will destroy itself. The great fear of the great depression is that the working class rises up and says we've had it with this system. It's too unstable. The crises are too uh increasing. Screw it. So Kanes saves the system, but at the price of the government having a major role. The libertarians are horrified. They represent that part of capitalism that hated the government. remembering the absolute monarchies of feudalism out of which capitalism came and against which it it coined the phrase leave us alone i.e. les a fair let us do on our own. So they have this deep commitment to not having a government. How ironic, how painful that they have to bring the government in to save their system. So they then indulge a fantasy. That's what libertarianism means to me. The fantasy that they ever could or ever would be able to function without the government. And so they become in the bad sense of the term religious. They indulge a fantasy utopianism about no government. And then here now they're confronted again with the same frustration because the only way to move towards no government is to have a massive government power move against all of the accumulated institutions. And then of course the poor uh libertarian will notice that that power of the government grows and grows and grows. They're having the same spectacle un unleashed by Mr. Trump that they used to hate in Franklin Roosevelt. There is no escape. You you poor poor you know misled folks. The government is part of a society. Unless of course you take the Marxist approach and see the government as the expression of a class divided society. If you think like that then you might have the idea if we can develop an economy without opposing classes. We remove the need for a government as a mediator. Ah oh. But for people who want to keep away from Marxism, don't think any for one minute about what I just said. Stay pure, stay clean, avoid that Marxist tradition, and just go to church on Sunday. >> Well, Richard, you of course you're right that libertarianism and much Christianity is a fantasy. I prefer to think of it as a cover story. It's always been a cover story, saying it. We're ethical. We're for uh freedom. were for uh prosperity. Uh but what are they really for? The the uh church always backed once once it was romanized in the Roman Empire and taken out of the hands of the early Christians, it was always uh religion was a tool for uh the opium of the people. You could say it's a fantasy. It's opium of the people. uh it's it's to uh claim to be a progressive and caring about people and protecting the poor. It hates the poor. It it rather it's it it loves the rich. It doesn't love the poor. It loves the rich and uh that includes loving them includes sharing their antagonism, antipacy towards the poor and their class hatred of uh labor in fact. So uh that's really the problem and it's not only with li it's a Christianity and libertarianism go together. It's I think it's hypocrit it's a hypocritical. So it's not it's a fantasy by most of the followers. It's designed to be a fantasy by a small core at the top. the bishops uh in Christianity, the uh the uh cardinals, the leadership uh and the followers, the sheep at the bottom, the shepherd and the sheep. That's not a very uh that's not the socialist uh idea of uh the kind of reform uh that we're we're talking about. So, uh I'm I'm more uh politically critical uh and suspicious of uh just uh how are how are we going to enlighten these wouldbe Christians, these would be libertarians? How do we say if you want your ideals, they're just what you've been talking about? Richard, >> let me just let me just end by reminding everyone of Marx's teacher Hegel. Markx writes, "Yes, religion is the opiate of the masses, but he also writes right there, it's also a haven in a heartless world." He understood why people embrace religion. what it is they're searching for and the need for those of us who are critics never to forget the real function it serves, the real needs it responds to. Even if we don't like how that response works, we better understand what it is the response to. So that we understand our task as partly to create the alternative response which is in a sense if you allow me what these conversations every week are about. >> Yeah, exactly. Thank you so much Richard and Michael. Great pleasure as always. >> Take care. Thank you. >> Take care. See you. Bye-bye.