Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, June 5th, 2025 and our friends Richard W and Michael Hodson are back with us. Welcome back. Glad to be here. Let's get started with Lindsey Graham and his latest visit to Ukraine. Not only Lindsey Graham Blumenthal and Mike Pompeo as well, they went to Ukraine. Here is what Lindsey Graham said, Richard. One of those cars that he's talking about is 500% secondary tariffs on Russian energy, which we know would influence China, India, and eventually Europe. Your take? Well, um, Lindsey Graham has been a bloiating, um, senator all his career. This is all theater. He has been all theater. He is all theater. He has gathered together the many other members of both houses who like him are thesbians uh at heart and politicians only. Secondarily, uh this is showmanship. That's all it it's. something that he has decided will improve his standing uh down there in the American South where he comes from and where he uh gets elected by people who approve that kind of theater even as their actual situations decline. We are no longer living in the world that appreciates that theater. What he doesn't understand as he invokes the world is that in view of the world, the very behavior he proposes is considered the actions of a rogue nation. A nation that is willing to threaten, disrupt global trade for the whole world. This is not admirable. This had nothing to do with bringing cards to a table. This is bullying behavior and it is doubly offensive because the bully isn't in charge anymore. The Chinese know and the Russians know, having spent the last 15 years building themselves up, growing their economies much faster than the United States and much faster than the United States and its G7 allies. that they now have in their bricks alliance people from whom they can buy, people to whom they can sell. And those people are more than half the population of the world and have shown in the Ukraine war that they can absorb whatever it is that the United States and Western Europe wish to do in interfering with the trade of Russia. When Russia couldn't sell its oil and gas to the Europeans, did they collapse the way the Europeans promised? No. Did the ruble disappear the way the Europeans promised? No. Did the levying of much more than a big tariff, a literal embargo? We're not going to buy your oil and gas. We're not going to let you use our swift international payments system. we're going to seize $300 billion dollars of assets uh back in your currency that you have kept in Western institutions and so on. All of these things which in total are a bigger effort against Russia than what Mr. um Lindsey Graham now proposes. They all failed. So I got news for Mr. Graham. His proposal, if it were adopted, will not only fail to hold back Russia and China in the way all the previous sanctions and limits and tariffs have failed, but will enhance the already badly damaged reputation of the United States. And I mean enhance it as a rogue, as the biggest single threat to global trade and global economic development in the world, which for the United States is a very bad sort of selfdestructive behavior. Well, Richard, you call America a rogue nation. Maline Albbright called America the exceptional nation. Uh and that's America's strength being a rogue nation. Think of it as a a rogue nation uh not with atom bombs which it won't use but with the ability to create chaos. And uh what uh Graham is threatening is we can create chaos in Europe and other countries by uh imposing this uh enormous uh tariff on countries that trade uh that obtain their gas from Europe instead of from us. uh and uh we can impose similar uh chaos on countries that trade uh with China and its companies. Huawei, I think there's already threats against that. Uh uh companies that uh use China's international payment system uh to avoid the US dollar. Uh the the aim of this chaos is to create an entirely new world order whose rules are the reverse of the economic order that America created in 1945 when it was uh the world's leading creditor nation and uh also the world's leading industrial power after in the wreckage of World War II. Uh now the situation is uh uh just the reverse. The United States is the world's major debtor nation uh mainly to other governments uh and it's also a de-industrialized nation, the most trade dependent nation uh of all. And so what uh the Republican administration with the full support of the Democrats is trying to do is how can we make a virtue uh of all of this? uh how can we somehow use our ability to create chaos uh to threaten other countries with these uh huge sanctions uh uh denying them access to the American market uh denying them military protection such as the United States had offered in uh uh World War II uh and instead making them prone to fighting with Russia as we've seen over the attacks by Ukraine on Russia with full backing of Britain's MI6 and uh Macron and Germans support. So uh the what Lindsey Graham was doing was bragging about America's strength in the ability to uh for to confront other nations with uh do you with what the United States can do to smash the whole international set of rules if they don't adopt the new rules that uh the Trump administration is trying to impose? Well, let me respond. Maybe maybe we disagree here. I agree with I agree with what you're saying. I I everything makes perfect sense to me, but I see it in a context that this is the behavior of a desperate government going going down and in the in the language I learned as a kid, trying to take everybody down with it. uh or or using whatever you might call the the last card, if we're going to stay with that metaphor, the last card they can imagine playing because they've run out of all the other cards that they used to have available, they don't have it available. The irony is the nuclear weapons they built up, they can't use, and the rest of the weapons they don't have anymore. Uh and so they're stuck with this sort of situation. uh I see it in now and I don't think it can work. I think it it's desperate not only because it is so disruptive and it is so chaotic and it is so risky but it's also desperate because I don't think the conditions are there and I think that more and more of the world sees that and you know for this kind of a a a major bluff to work you can't be seen as bluffing and I think what what the world sees here is bluffing and that when he does it one day and undoes it the next day, the notion that this could be bluffing becomes a virtual certainty. He wants to get some concessions so that he looks like he's dominant in some way. And so by yelling f 5 500% and actually setting for selling settling later for 10% he can make some claim that he got something and he looks better for the evening television. But you know that only works for a while until everybody realizes that's what you're doing and that's what we have now. you know, the the the signs that are accumulating that we may have both stagnation starting in the second half of this year and inflation getting going in the second half of this year. Well, you know, those are signs that this is a very risky line of action. And you have to ask the logical question, why would you be doing this? And after we make the cracks that the whole world is making, that he's unstable or he's looking to make money or he's looking to get attention, all of which have their grains of truth, you still have to ask the question, why in this way would this man act at this point? And there I think the desperation of the American Empire's decline is the answer. Well, let's talk about this bluff then. There's method behind the madness and uh I uh they actually have a a plan. It's a mad plan. You're right. Other countries can see through it. But let's walk through exactly what their plan is because they've spilled it out in detail and it's worth going over. I think uh I when Trump and Rubio acknowledge that we're entering uh a multipolar world, I think what they mean is that Europe, Asia, other continents are now they're all on their own in the sense of every country for itself. And to Trump that means the United States is going to act for itself uh in its own interest uh uh to try to be the winner. And what its interest is is actually creating a new world order in which other countries somehow can be locked in to dependency on the United States even though we're no longer a creditor nation, even though we're no longer a trade surplus country and even though we're making other countries militarily endangered, not uh protecting them anymore. And I think that Trump's strategy is to save the US economy uh and its foreign policy from having to bear the loss of its financial and trade dominance that it le that led it to create the post 1945 order in its own interest. That that order lasted 80 years and it's now changing. And they actually have a plan and they've outlined the plan for what they want to do. And I I think uh of course it's a bluff. Uh but let's go over exactly why uh it's going to fail. uh instead of the United States offering financial support, it's now demanding that the rest of the world support its own financial position and even its domestic reckless budget deficit and uh in other countries are supposed to uh oppose the uh China Russia by mounting joining a new cold war uh to prevent China, Russia and the bricks countries from shaping a a new world economic order. That's the the guiding strategy. And I think the first aim of the global majority that the United States is opposing is having to avoid the use of the US dollar uh as I think you pointed out for their mutual trade and investment uh and as a vehicle for their saving their foreign exchange reserves in the form of holding treasury securities and uh lending to the United States government. This is what uh this balance of payments uh aspect of uh the the the current uh crisis is I think certainly to me uh the key. So the United States does have uh it doesn't have atom bombs. Uh but as I said it does have uh the Trump card uh and Trump's ability to create chaos. And as the old joke goes, if you own the bank $10,000 and you can't pay, then you're in trouble. But if you owe the bank 10 million or a hundred million or a billion dollars, then the bank's in trouble. And foreign central banks are holding US securities uh and those of its federal agencies, uh they have a problem. How can they secure the value of all of the savings that they've mounted up since 1971? Since the US went off gold and uh all of the world's central bank savings are already in uh u in US dollars, the United States owes them so much money that all of a sudden it's now using its debtor power instead of its creditor power as a means to control them by threatening uh chaos. uh and Trump is trying to fight to to create a new illusion that somehow uh will give the illusion of solvency uh to this if their other countries agreed to new worlds. Well, the fact is the United States could pay other countries if it were willing to follow the policies that it and the IMF have demanded of global south countries for the last 80 years. Namely, uh you pay your debts by selling off your public infrastructure, selling off your raw materials rights, increase taxes on income and uh wealth so that uh this money will not be available to consumers to buy imports. That's how you generate a balance of payment surplus to pay your creditors. Well, the United States has a double standard and again says, well, we're the exceptional country. It's not going to do what it's uh uh what the old economic order forced the global south countries to do. The United States could roll back its military spending, which has long been the major component of its balance of payments deficits ever since the Korean War in 1950. It could cut back its new foreign investment and it could begin selling off its existing investments in Europe, Asia, other countries to pay its creditors. That's exactly what uh the IMF and the United States insist that uh Argentina and other uh debtor countries can do. But the United States is refusing to do these things. And it's an that's what makes it an outlaw country when it comes to the rules of uh traditional financial debt settlement. It's using its strength as a debtor uh no longer as a creditor. And that's what's turned the world upside down. And it's used this to somehow be able to uh create a uh a moral order in which uh it it can convince at least its satellite rulers, people like merits and Macron and Starmer to uh continue to sacrifice their economies to support this new US economic order. Okay. But let me respond by saying I don't think he can do these things domestically or internationally. That that that may be the plan. That may be the method in the madness. I understand that argument, but I don't think it's doable. And I think the desperation is again visible in coming up with a plan like that for which the world is no longer willing to be treated that way. And I think he he's learning it at every turn. The Chinese are not bending no matter what. You know, let's remember he had tariffs a few weeks ago in the neighborhood of 140 whatever it was percent. And that made no difference at all. You know, he just had in a meeting with Xi Jinping, if I understand, yesterday, a telephone call, having spent the last 10 days asking for one. That's not the behavior of somebody who is terrorized by what you're proposing or what you're threatening. The Chinese took the time and the care to produce an economic miracle uh which includes an alliance that is crucial to them precisely because it creates enough of a world market for them to buy from and sell to that the United States's abilities and we won't let you here. Okay. Don't I want to remind people over the last week, if I'm not mistaken, um all the leaders of of Europe were on their knees cutting deals with with the Chinese. They're desperate, too. And they are the ones because of their subordination, their inability to act independently from the United States anywhere is now hobbling them. They are learning that the cost of being subordinate to the United States can be very high. They were writing nicely for several uh decades. They were able to be social democratic to their own working class because the United States saved them from spending money on defense. But the United States can't do it for the reasons Michael just summarized. of the United States is throwing the Europeans right under the bus. We're not doing this anymore. You're going to have to do it for yourself. Yes, but we can't do that and be the social democratic uh societies we were developed over history to be. And if you make us impose an austerity, then you will see that the Melon Shon in France and their equivalents everywhere else will take the power in Europe because they can ride your abil inability. The Germans, we're spending a$80 billion dollar on defense. Oh, really? How's that going to play in their own country? Not well. Mr. Mertz is a very thin majority. Mr. Macron has no majority. And Starmer has pissed away the little bit of bump he got because the conservatives were so awful. They now face the reality that another Trump-like figure, Farage, may become their next lead. I mean, these are societies in advanced levels of of decay. So, I don't think the United States can do most of what it is they're threatening to do. I just I don't see it. I don't see them able to get the rest of the world to go along with this desperate effort now that they're a dead nation. Now that the rest of the world has caught up or exceeded them, they're not in a position to dictate and they don't understand it. They have the biggest military. They are very rich. Is very hard for them as it was for the British before them to understand that they are now going back to what they were, a small offshore wet island off of Europe. That's the British Empire's resting place. And the United States is going its path to a decline from its peak. And all you have is a desperate leadership that wants on the one hand to pander to the public awareness by pretending that decline of the empire isn't happening while at the same time taking these extraordinarily desperate chaotic disruptive steps in a final last effort to do what isn't anymore available to them to do. And this is this is a recipe for real trouble mostly here at home. Richard, you're elaborating my points. Of course, I agree with that. What I'm doing is uh explaining if you look at exactly what the US plan is in detail, you see exactly why it won't work. Of course, it won't work. uh and when you look at the details there actually is a plan and it is so crazy that it won't work and that's what I want to uh explain uh exactly why it won't work. For instance, we mentioned I think last week uh Treasury Secretary Bessant's proposal that foreign countries stretch out the maturity of their Treasury IUS for 100 years. That's uh pretty illquid. That's like saying we can't pay within my lifetime or the lifetime of my children. Uh it's pie in the sky. In other words, uh you lend us the money, write it all off. You can pretend that it's money. You can pretend that it has value. Uh let's have a just pretend new economic order. That's what uh the American policy rests on. Pretense. Of course, not the real thing. It's the pretense of every Ponzi scheme dynamics where debts grow and grow and grow and all it requires new entrance into the scheme. More and more foreign central banks will hold the dollars. More and more countries will invest their trade surpluses and balance of payment surpluses uh in the dollar to to uh somehow give the illusion of solvency. But it's it's not going to exist. Well, what uh the what the plan of Vessant and uh the Treasury wants is that other countries are going to commit their accumulated international savings. All of what they've saved since 1971 to back US unipolar military and foreign policy hedgeimonyy. And this foreign support aims at the United States to pursue this uh massively polarizing tax shift from financial wealth uh onto labor and industry. That's the Republican plan. Uh huge tax cuts for the wealthiest uh 10% of the population. All the rest of the population, labor, industry, agriculture has its uh uh taxes go up. So uh the foreign central banks and the uh dollarbased international order the uh these they're enablers to America's attempt to maintain its unipolar control of world diplomacy behind the cold war that Lindsey Graham and uh others are trying uh to back. Uh so far Trump has not uh criticized Lindsey Graham. U other uh other people are well uh the uh this uh solution of somehow saying US Treasury bills are uh never to be paid. They're a sort of permanent floating debt. Uh at the same time, Treasury uh and and Trump are telling its allies that uh to be able to pay down its debts. If you really want us to pay them down, then you have to enable us to export to you and earn the money. That means that uh sure we can uh you can enable us to pay you by letting American industry uh replace your industry. Your u car German car companies and technology companies can relocate the United States and if you re relocate here you you uh we can export and then we'll we'll be able to export to you. your your industry is going to have to be wound down, which of course it will be if you can't get Russian energy anymore and have to depend on our energy, you know, move to the United States where everything's uh uh uh less expensive. Well, the the the whole all of this idea that somehow the United States can uh use its uh de-industrialization as a weapon, it reflects a a false uh line that it's taken in development really since the 1990s. Uh it's the United States is trying to say uh we can maintain our trade supremacy by focusing on monopoly goods on information technology, military technology, uh social media platforms and uh these are these were considered uh the high value added industries and the idea was the United States says well we don't need uh blue collar manufacturing we we don't need labor intensive industries and in fact u shifting offshoring our uh employment to Asia is going to help hold down our domestic wage levels uh and all of that. Well, all of a sudden something very strange has happened. All of a sudden, uh, if you look at what is happening with China today, amazingly enough, the United States has become dependent on low-wage industrial economies. All of this uh, industry that it is outsourced to China and other countries is now uh, threatened with being blocked by uh, Trump's tariffs. And the United States can't uh uh doesn't have the ability to produce these goods itself, even to the point of making screws to screw down the uh uh the keyboards of the the iPhones that uh that am that that are made by uh Apple. So uh the the nobody expected the United States to become more dependent on low-wage uh industries that uh in instead of where China and other countries have almost caught up with the information technology with the dollar transfer systems uh not needing the dollar not needing the swift uh with with all of these things And this has turned the whole uh traditional idea of uh uh international advantage uh up upside down. the United States can't reindustrialize to uh somehow earn the money to pay off its foreign debts uh because uh the Chinese economist Ling Lin Lu Fang has pointed out that industrialization uh requires having the whole broad spectrum of industry including uh the the sectors that the United States has looked down on. uh you know like textiles uh and even what the United States considered low-wage industries before all of a sudden China is is robotizing all of these and so now you're having products that were made by low-wage manual labor made by uh robot robot factories. The United States hasn't developed anything like this. the United States all of a sudden finds itself dependent on the smallest things that are key for its supply chains as uh you and I have discussed before on on NEPA. These are supply chains for screws for the most for uh steel uh for various inputs not to mention uh the rare earths and everything which uh China is not going to uh uh reduce its national security uh limit. So uh the United States has a skewed pattern of production. It's focused on uh the um the internet uh the information technology but it doesn't have the most basic thing uh basic industries that are needed to earn the money to somehow move its trade into uh a surplus to pay off its debt. So the trade problem is uh handinhand with the insolveny problem and the fact is that other countries are broke and here's what faces other countries. Here's the choice. Are they going to say okay we've been suck we've followed a blind alley that we've put all of our savings in the United States. uh are we going to just accept the loss and uh go and create and join the global majority in uh a new restructuring of their economies? Uh or are we going to say uh we we we we can't afford the uh disruption of a year, a twoyear or three years and we're going to have to remain dependent on the United States because otherwise the value of our foreign exchange reserves is uh essentially blocked. uh the our ability to trade with China and Russia is blocked and uh we're locked into a dependency on trade with the United States that has to be a deepening and deepening loss uh for us because the United States plan when you look at it is so uh facious in its assumptions so badly structured that of course it won't work. That's really the the political choice that's facing uh Europe and the whole uh rest of the world. Let me add a couple if I can. name and Michael um in in recent days looking at literature about the automobile industry I came across a number of comments in which people who are not involved in the kind of conversation we're having whose focus is much more narrowly concentrated on the international automobile business are projecting several of them that the relocation of automobile industry will in fact not be to the United States but to China. Why? Because of what Michael just said. They have all of the components including the rare earths which are crucial for those batteries without which the electric vehicle doesn't function. And if you are going to move to the United States and if the United States isn't going to be able to get them from China, you're moving to your own destruction. You cannot do that. you'd be much better advised to build your automobile, your Volkswagen or your Peugeot or your Fiat in China where you can be sure of access to the rare earths without which you can't build a car anyway. So that's one thing. Here's another one. The history of monopoly in capitalism. Let's remember what it is. It's when the producer of something can capture the market in the sense of becoming the only mono seller poly monopoly the only seller. Why? because then you can not only make the profit built in to the surplus you get from your worker, but you can jack up the price above cost and get what's called a monopoly revenue on top of it. But the very existence of that, for example, in the high-tech industry in Silicon Valley, and this is the history of capitalism, the minute you get a monopoly revenue, you become the object of envy and competition from everybody else because you're getting outlandish rates of return. And so the flow of capital is to try to get a piece of that since it's much more profitable than to staying in the competitive areas of the economy. So now we have deepseek. We have the Chinese who have demonstrated that when you have tried to copy, you can do it. Huawei can produce the relevant chips. So can the other companies. If the United States is developing a strategy that has the quality of depending on the monopoly position that its high techch industries achieved for a while, then I've got news for them. You're going to lose it. The monopolists always do. General Motors and Ford once had a monopoly. They don't anymore. And you're not going to keep that monopoly here. Which means your strategy which assumes a certain monopoly position is a strategy built on sand that is ebbing away. The Chinese are working on that too. And by the way, not only the Chinese, others. And so this is a ve this is not only risky for all the reasons we've aduced but it's risky in terms of where the actualities of international capitalist competition lie. The Chinese have a dominant position in rare earths and crucial industries, not just the automobile industry, air uh air traffic, airplanes, defense, those are also requiring rare earths. Now, will the United States make an effort to get new sources? Sure they will. May they succeed? They may. But we are now the more and more we talk the more and more hopefully you're all picking up on the conditions the many many conditions that suggest that the strategy being pursued now is well it is so risky that I believe the word desperation captures it. Yes, it's desperate and that's why I'm trying to spell out uh what its strategy is so you can see uh just uh in detail how desperate it is and it gets worse and worse. uh um um uh I think you could say for the last two centuries uh most of America's uh technological uh innovation maybe not most but much has been uh from immigrants uh from uh individuals scholars scientists uh technical labor fleeing uh the fight for freedom in their own country to come to the United States well uh the United States I think there are 250,00 000 Chinese students in the United States and now uh the United States is uh acting to block uh these students. Well, there was a China has been complaining as other countries before it have about the brain drain. They're saying, "Well, you know, we have these uh uh we've uh spent all the uh effort in raising these students, sending them to uh school in China, and now they're going to United States for graduate studies, studying the STEM uh curriculum, and now they're deciding to work for American companies uh being trained there. uh and uh so we're losing a lot of our own uh technical labor because look at the American uh high-tech industries that are uh developed largely by Chinese labor. Well, uh Trump has said we don't want any more brain drain from China. We want to send the Chinese back to China so that uh they're they will be able to work to help develop Chinese technology, not American technology. uh and he's he's he's not only that but uh the one key most apart from foreign uh brain drain to the United States developing technology it's government subsidized research and development everything from uh the Manhattan project for the atom bomb to so uh so much uh development has been government subsidy to universities to uh develop pharmaceuticals uh technology, internet technology that the government then gives to the private sector is a gift to create the monopoly from this vast government spending uh government subsidized uh technology. Uh this is all being cut back uh from Harvard to other universities. That's what Elon Musk did. Uh don't subsidize government research and development. concentrate the research and development in China uh and Asia not in the United States. Uh we're not going to be doing that anymore. Uh and the reason is that many people many of the scientists who wanted to uh uh develop technology also want peace instead of war. And if any of them say we're for peace for any uh uh war, well all of a sudden that is called I won't get into the uh uh the Zionist problem, but uh the students who are expressing political views other than uh the US official foreign policy are being blocked from the United States, sent back to their countries. So the United States has cut off the two major sources of uh what uh was uh providing technological advantage immigration and government subsidy of un of uh university research and development. Yeah, I would like to stress that and also to take it a step back into the very economic structure. The Chinese version of modern economy is about 50% private capitalist enterprise, both Chinese and foreign, and 50% government-owned and operated enterprises. That's what they mean when they say uh they've got socialism with Chinese characteristics. The Soviet Union was much more government. The United States and Britain is much more private. The Chinese is a hybrid that is different and has to be highly controlled from above because you've got these two horses that don't run in the same way in the same direction. But the genius of what they've done, which explains why they've been growing two to three times faster than the US for every one of the last 30 years, is because whatever the private profit motivation cannot accomplish because of its limits, the government can. that the other half can make the investments that aren't governed by a shortrun profit calculus. And the irony of what Michael just said is that in the United States, a modest, too small version of that was the government subsidizing the university to do some of that long range notp profofit dominated research. the idiocy of what's being done to cut back the government support to get rid of the immigrants who are often the driving force of much of it. That is that is a concession to the backlash of 30 years of globalization and neoliberalism. You've the liberals are every bit as responsible for that. the Democrats as the Republicans, they were all cheerleaders for globalization, for liberalization, for automation and relocating jobs and all of the rest of it. And now they see the backlash that puts a guy in power who has to do all of the things necessary to hold on to his demagogic base. So yes, of course, he has to tell, you know, a dozen countries in Africa that they're not welcome to send anybody to the United States. This is grotesque to deport immigrants. What are you doing? 10 million in a country of 330 million makes no difference. It's irrelevant. What are you doing? You're pandering, of course. But the pandering without which he can't be president is going to have and is having real negative self-destructive economic effects. And I noticed in the last few days that whether it's from Goldman Sachs or Bank of America or Ray Dallio or uh Jamie Diamond, there is a growing chorus of very big businessmen who are saying uhoh this is spinning from their perspective out of control. Well, you made the very important point that I uh that uh chi of China's uh government uh shaping its technology and uh the United States is a more centralized uh planning economy uh than China uh but it's been planned by the financial sector uh for its own financial uh purposes and uh that China never had a financial sector because when Ma's revolution uh occurred they didn't have a financial sector and the government had to uh itself provide the money and uh credit policy and uh uh the credit system is designed to finance tangible capital investment in u research development industry factories uh machinery uh education and infrastructure as opposed to United States uh My friend Carl Sanchez has uh his Carlo's gymnasium where he re he's been publishing reports by the Chinese officials explaining exactly what makes their uh planning so different. And uh uh they they point out that in the 1930s all the way through the 1960s when I went to school we all had to read gardener and means reports on uh the uh the separation in the United States between uh financial ownership of industry and management. finance would uh uh the financial sector would finance industry but leave the uh corporate uh leadership to uh CEOs who were engineers or marketing specialists not financial specialists. But all this began to change in the 1980s and all of a sudden the uh the financeers made themselves the managers of companies instead of the industrial managers instead of having the purpose of the companies to increase market share to increase output to uh increase production. Uh the purpose was simply to make wealth by financial means as we've spoken before by stock buybacks by paying out dividends by increasing the price of stocks instead of lowering the price of uh production for uh what they're doing. And uh you had financial capitalism replace the dynamic of industrial uh capitalism. And so the Chinese call this industrial socialism. Uh it's not really industrial capitalism that evolved into finance capitalism. It's it's a uh government support of industry not to make uh uh profits and economic rents for the 10% and the 1% but for the entire economy uh to benefit. That's what makes socialism different from capitalism ultimately. And uh in uh in the 19th century as we've said everybody expected uh capitalism industrial capitalism to evolve into socialism. That's not what happened. And instead it's been China and its uh fellow socialist economies that have picked up this idea of using um uh industry, agriculture and most of all money and credit creation to increase the productivity and living standards of the economy. Not to centralize uh wealth in the hands of the uh 1% and 10%. That's really the conflict of economic systems that is behind this whole new cold war between the United States and Europe on the one hand and China, Russia, Iran and the BRICS countries on the other. all of this attempt to somehow maintain US hedgeimonyy with this crazy uh germandered uh logic of finance and uh uh trade chaos uh that that I've mentioned is all to somehow uh maintain the finance capital system as part of the uh cold war against uh the industrial socialism that really was I think it's the destin of civilization to go in that d uh the direction the United States is not part of that direction of in which the rest of civilization is going in. If I could Nema I want to pick up on this last point of Michael because I think basically it's more important than anything else we've said here. Here is the the crucial thing that Michael just did. He connected the dilemmas of the United States relative to what is going on in this case in China. Not to the Chinese want to be the next empire or the Chinese want to replace the Americans as the hedgeim. None of that. What he did was to link the different positions and therefore the different prospects of the United States on the one hand and China on the other to the organization of their economic systems. In his case, he stressed the difference between the industrial and financial sectors, let's call them, of the economy. I would argue just to expand it that that's what ought to be the discussion. Why did the Chinese grow two to three times faster than the United States? Why have they caught up technologically? Why have they made the best electric car at a time when the electric car is going to be the means of transportation for the next 50 years likely, etc. And that's there we get then to the question what what can a what can a society do that has a 50/50 split between public and private enterprise that has one governed by the profit motive and the other one by a different set of notions and calculations. Wow. That would be then you but we can't do that in this country because that questions the capitalist system that we have puts it immediately in second place having to justify why in the world would you hold on to a society that has organized its industry and its finance in the way we have given that there's an other way that has worked much better. that that is so frightening as the proper question that we have to get rid of it. We have to make this a struggle of personalities of of the communist party against all irrelevant. The fundamental question is how did you organize your economy to get this result? And if it weren't an ideologically unbearable question, it would be the one we would all be discussing now. That's the irony of all of this. Uh what has made China so different is why did America de-industrialize? And it de-industrialized because of financialization. And China has avoided financialization because it doesn't have the financial interests. And when you had uh Secretary of the Treasury Bessant uh a week ago saying China has to not only open its markets, what we really want is China has to let in American banking. Let us finance your industry. Well, you you know that China's not going to do that because if you let American finance banking do to China what it did to the American economy, it's going to hell. Yeah. Yeah. And the absolutely you know there's an old saying that capitalists capitalism will disappear because and when the capitalists will be selling to their executioners the rope with which to be then executed. when the in the starting in the 1970s when large numbers of American capitalists saw the opportunity for a quick profit by relocating their businesses into China and they sat down and the Chinese said we will give you cheap labor and we will give you access to our market which is growing much faster than yours and in exchange we want your techn technology. When that deal was struck voluntarily by American big business, you had the the beginnings of the process whose conclusion we are now discussing. Yeah. Right. What can that's that's what we've been that is basically our theme for the last half year that we've been saying and of course the United States is trying to now convince China to sell uh uh to sell us the the rope to uh hang it militarily by the uh rare earth that are key for our military armaments uh against it which is why China says you're blocking us on national security grounds we're going to show you national security grounds. Well, let's see where the American economy is in six months. As you said earlier, let's just see what happens. Uh where where are we going to be this? I think I think we're going to see a lot of it much sooner than six months. I I I I really do believe the pre-tariff inventories have now been exhausted. the tariffs are going to show up in reduced imports. Already this last month's balance of trade is sharply different from the previous years uh in in one variable declining imports. Okay, if you attach a a tariff, that's what you get. And they haven't even hit yet in in many cases. So you're also seeing the greed of our capitalists who know that in a world full of discussions of tariffs, they can raise their prices and claim it has to do with tariffs and no one will know and they thereby es escape blame for raising their prices to make more profits. And when and they have also as you remember the dollar has shrunken eight or nine% since since Mr. Bush took office. So you have the diminishing value of the dollar and the tariff. You're really hitting the American imports with a one-two punch that's going to show up starting now. Yeah. Okay. We're going along with you. uh you know, we'll accept all of your tariffs. You know, we're not going to bargain with you. We're not going to argue. We're just going you you impose your tariffs. Let's see what economy breaks first. Yeah. Let me just put one of our audience have he has some sort of comment on here is what he said. Nemo, please ask Professor Hudson and Wolf to teach an economic curriculum online. He would be willing to pay for that. Yeah. Well, let let me say in response that I have thought about that. Um, I've thought about that because um we Michael and I and Nema have thought about doing something with the transcripts of these programs uh now for over a year. And I have thought that given the reaction I see to what we do here that in effect uh Nema is taking us through a kind of course in economics in which a series of related questions are posed each time and that as the statistical reality unfolds in front of us and I look at some different reports from those at cycle looks at we are able to come together and enrich one another's grasp of what's going on and it becomes a a course in in the immediate economic reality that we're all living through. So I mean I I appreciate that you that you see that too. It's it's one more voice uh pushing us to think about that. Yeah. Yeah. There is a common denominator between Richards and my uh intellectual and political backgrounds. Yes. Yes. And and and it has to do with the initials K and M. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael, for being with us today. Great pleasure as always. Same here. Same here. See you soon. Bye-bye.