Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, May 29th, 2025 and our friends Richard W and Michael Wson are back with us. Welcome back. Glad to be back. Thank you. Yeah, Michael, let's get started with you. How is the current global fracture between the western economies and the global majority similar to the industrial capitalist revolution in 18th and 19th century Europe? Well, to explain that uh I should give a little prefaratory note that both Richard and I are classical economists. We follow the value theory that was developed by Adam Smith and Ricardo and John Stewart Mill and others uh whose uh an analysis all sort of led up to marks. The problem is that the modern economic curriculum doesn't talk about the value theory and the price theory and the rent theory that classical economists developed. the only people talking about this is are Marxists. So that's sort of ironic that uh uh we're both classical economists but we're called Marxists and we identify ourselves with Marxist because uh Markx wrote the first history of economic thought his theories of surplus value where he talks about how the classical analysis of uh the physiocrats and Smith and the others their value theory and their price theory all sort of led up to the problems that he uh he he discussed in capital. Uh he devoted volume one to what he had added to their theories, but volume two and three described the rent theory and the financial theory and the real estate theory that led up all of this. And it may surprise a lot of uh viewers to know that uh we believe in the classical free market. And but what the classical economists meant by a free market was something free of the vested interests carving out income for themselves that had nothing to do with a production process uh and or barriers to the success of industrial capitalism. And it was the role of classical political economy to develop a value and price theory as a tool to isolate economic rent unearned income which it was a tax task of industrial capitalism to end in order to make Britain the workshop of the world in in order to enable France, Germany and industrial powers to become the industrial powers uh that they became the classical uh industrial strategy was classical economics, political economy and that's what made industrial capitalism itself so revolutionary in clearing away the vestigages of feudalism and uh that's in a way what the uh BRICS countries are facing today in trying to develop their own plan for their own markets to free themselves from the legacy of colonialism. M and from the US- centered uh neoliberalism that has dominated government policy all throughout the world and is imposed by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and uh the economic uh brainsstream mainstream. So our position is that the British countries are facing a problem that's very similar to that that faced Europe's industrial capitalist countries in the late 18th century with the French physiocrats and Adam Smith who was uh influenced by them uh through the end of the 19th century. Britain, France, Germany and others had to cope with the vested interests carried over from feudalism. And today the BRICS countries have to fa uh confront a similar leg legacy. this legacy of colonialism and foreign investment and client archet uh oligarchies who control who whose ownership of their raw materials resources their land the privatized uh private uh public utilities that they have are all burdens on them and are preventing them from developing in a way that for instance enabled China's growth to be so successful. So what we want to talk about is and this is going to be the political issue that is dividing the BRICS countries over the next few years. It took an entire century for industrial capitalism to try to clear away the vested interests of real estate, banking and monopolies. And in the end it failed. There was an anti-class reaction that uh we're still living uh with today. We want to describe how the BRICS countries can follow uh the this value price and rent theory to free themselves from unearned income from all these classes, foreign investors uh and domestic uh rent seekers that have nothing to do with the production process and are blocking them from uh devoting their uh fiscal revenues, their government revenue venues, their foreign exchange earnings, and their foreign trade from industrializing. Maybe I should let Richard say a few things here. Go ahead. Before I do, I I want to take my hat off to Michael. This is not a you know a mutual celebration uh conversation but this is a very important thing to have figured out that what the BRICS nations what China are what they're doing now is analogous to has lots of parallels with what the initial Western European break from feudalism was all about and that they are trying to achieve for themselves a comparable breakthrough with the improvements in income and so on that went with it. And that the people who made the revolution back in the 18th and 19th century in Europe now occupy the obverse or the reverse position. They are the new feudal lords against whom they revolted. They have now become and the global south has taken over the historically progressive and dynamic moment. And notice I'm not talking about socialism yet. That's another issue. Socialism is the recognition that even what they're doing isn't going to get them what they hope it will. You know, Markx looked around in the middle of the 19th century and he said, "I love the the slogan of the French Revolution, liberty, equality, fraternity, and I love what the American Revolution added to that democracy." And I understand that the leaders of the revolt against feudalism promised that alongside the end of Lord and Surf, alongside replacing that with employer and employee would come as a fantastic social benefit, liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy. But I have to tell you, said Marx, writing in the London of Charles Dickens, that we don't have liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy. What capitalism promised it could not deliver. And that has been true ever since. And so Marx's project, if you allow me to say such a thing, was to answer the question, why did capitalism fail to deliver on the liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy it promised? That's not to question the sincerity of the promise. It was sincere. Rob Spierre meant it. Thomas Jefferson in his way meant it. But they couldn't do it. they couldn't get it done. And Marx's answer, which makes him so important, is that capitalism itself is the barrier to realizing liberty, equality, and don't look elsewhere. Don't look outside. It's right inside. There's something that capitalism preserves that prevents it from overcoming the autocracy, the slavery, all the rest of it of previous history. And that is the fact that there's something frighteningly similar between master and slave on the one hand, lord and surf on the next hand, and on that famous third hand, employer employee. You've kept that dichotomy. And in that retaining of that dichotomy, a minority at the top, a vast majority at the bottom, you have precluded liberty, democracy. You've created a 100 years or 200 years of honest, good, well-meaning people trying to overcome inequality and all the rest of it, unable to succeed because they haven't absorbed Marx's lesson. If you want liberty, equality, fraternity, and democracy, you've got to get rid of capitalism. Otherwise, you're for doomed. you will fail as we have. Every time you read about Elon Musk, you're staring failure right in the face. Okay. So, what what what Michael has done is focus us even more beyond that. He's helped us to identify landlord listen because I really want to go through it a little bit. Landlords, monopolists, and uh bankers. Now what role did they play that had to be overcome? Well, the answer is given by what reaction happened once classical economics really hit its stride. And that's what we call the neocclassical revolution dating around 1870 1880 when in Europe you have an explosion of socialism that questions capitalism and that uses Marx's version of the labor theory of value to make its case to say that the world is divided between the proletariat that produces a surplus and the capitalists who take it and use it to reproduce that situation, that way of organizing the economy. That's why the workers are forever without resources and in trouble. And you know the the the answer is always that the capitalists have cornered the surplus and are using it to keep the surplus which is not surprising or shouldn't surprise anyone. And so one of the ways that this is done is by creating these special classes of people. And that's where the beauty of the analogy with feudalism comes in. the landlords. Markx was was at his humorous best when he simply teaches us, you know, the working class has always understood. Why are we paying work landlords a rent? They didn't create the land. They had nothing to do with producing the land. And you know, if we stopped paying them, that wouldn't mean the land disappeared. The land is there. That's what we need. We don't need the landlord. And paying him simply removes a part of the value created by workers from being available to develop their economy and instead supports an extravagant lifestyle for people who are effectively parasites on the system. and that monopolists are doing the same thing. They're getting a payment for what they sell beyond what it costs to produce. They shouldn't be getting that money. That money is then withdrawn by them for whatever it is they think of they would like to do, but it's no longer available to the workers and the industrial capitalists who presumably would use it otherwise. And the same is true of the bankers. The working class has often been confused between the industrial capitalist who takes the surplus from them and the moneyed capitalist who sits and watches the whole process and collects his interest. But the rent, the monopoly price and the interest are deductions of a surplus produced by the workers that could be used otherwise. And the revolt of classical economics was to show that and the counterrevolution of neocclassical economics was to obliterate that understanding to make everything a question of supply and demand. If there's a demand for it, well then it must be valuable. The capitalist demands workers. See, they're valuable. The banker demands interest. It must be valuable. There we go. We have fudged away the surplus. We have fudged away everything the labor theory of value helped us to see. And the neocclassicals double the horror because they're proud of not paying attention to the labor theory of value. For them, this is an achievement of greater theoretical precision. Whereas for us, it's the obvious effort of a system that is no longer dynamically moving society forward, but is now entrenching parasitical elements that will be a problem for our societies as long as we allow them to exist. Well, the key word that Richard has used again and again in what he's just said is value. And uh Markx pointed out that uh what made industrial capitalism so revolutionary was that it wanted to strip away from the economy all of the claims on income that didn't reflect value which was defined as a necessary cost of production. Uh it was ultimately uh resol uh resolved by the cost of labor uh according to Ricardo. But the fact is if you were looking at a say what makes monopoly rent it's to charge over and above the necessary cost of production that uh the monopolists face. Uh and although capitalism was revolutionary in wanting to get rid of the landlord class and uh it recognized that rent was always going to exist. some land is more uh on a site that is more valuable than others. That's what makes uh the same houses in some neighborhoods much more uh expensive uh than others. And uh that's because uh the there may be parks, there may be uh nearness to transportation, there may be museums, there may be all the things that public spending uh adds. Well, capitalism was revolutionary. and wanting to get rid of uh to all of the unnecessary costs of production, what Markx called the false class of production, uh economic rent to the landlords, that the rent is going to exist, but that should be the tax base. And if rent is the tax base, then you're not going to have to tax labor and industry. As long as the landlords controlled the governments of Europe, which they had done ever since feudalism, they were going to avoid paying taxes themselves. And they were going to force uh labor and industry to pay the taxes. And the uh industrialists said, "If we have to pay our uh wage earners enough money to be able to pay economic rent to the landlords and monopoly rent to the monopolists and run into debt and pay interest to the banks, then we're not going to be able to be competitive internationally." uh Britain cannot be the workshop of the world as long as it doesn't have political reform to end the landlord's control of the government and its tax system. And uh all all of that uh was revolutionary. It it the idea of industrial capitalism was to streamline the cost of production. But as uh and it turned out that uh doing this was a precondition for a free market that is a market free from economic rent to uh begin to evolve. And as Richard has just explained, the solving the aims of the industrial revolution for the industrial class didn't address the problems for the vast majority of the population that was uh increasingly the wage earning class along with the agricultural class. uh and Markx believed that uh in once you had freed markets and economies from the power of the rent seekers, they would naturally evolve into socialism. So while socialism uh went beyond capitalism, it was capitalism that Markx saw as evolving into socialism. And one uh this this evolution Mark said was going to begin with the government uh supplying the means of production for uh all sorts of basic services such as public utilities, communications, uh all the things that uh Europe certainly started by keeping in the public domain. uh the post office, transportation, uh all of these uh uh basic services. The uh Europeans and the Americans following them realized if you leave these uh services in private hands, then the private owners are going to charge uh monopoly rents over and above profits. Uh they're going to uh become exploitative. And so, uh, industrial capitalism needed an an active role in government to replace the monopolies that had been created during the medieval period, largely to provide uh governments and kings with the money to pay bankers for the foreign debts that they ran up to finance their wars. uh and banking was basically aimed at uh arranging war financing, government financing. Uh banking did not play a role in uh the early industrial revolution. Uh they they bankers didn't help finance uh the uh the steam engine and uh all uh the mechanization of production that was done by the industrial capitalists. They wanted government support for uh for this uh industrialization. Uh and uh they of course they didn't want to have to raise the wages they paid. But there they realized that labor needed high wages in order to be productive in order to uh become industrial labor. And the the high wages took the form very largely of cutting the cost of living by these governments uh playing the role as uh uh receiving uh the land rent so that it didn't have to tax labor and so labor didn't have to pay landlords uh and so labor wouldn't have to pay monopoly prices. uh the whole idea was to streamline uh the means of production and that was what the economists meant by a free market. Well, what uh Richard has just said there was a counterrevolution against this and when uh uh people like Frederick Hayak and Margaret Thatcher talked about free market with something called the Adam Smith Institute meant a market free for rent seekers, for landlords, for monopolists. uh free of any government regulation to prevent uh rent interests. And so industrial capitalism in the 19th century uh accelerating in the 1980s became the antithesis of the revolution that industrial capitalism sought to create. Well, that's uh how are the bricks going to cope with this? What do they need uh to uh to realize that uh the although industrial capitalism failed in the west? How can they proceed in a way that it succeeds uh for what they're doing? How do they uh free themselves? Well, take the issue of land rent, natural resource rent. Foreign investors play the role uh in the bricks countries and the global south that Europe's hereditary aristocracy did in Europe. They invaded. They took control of the natural resources and revenue. And while the uh Britain, France, and America were all for getting rid of economic rent in their own economies, when they uh established colonies and when they tried to economically take over uh the what became the global south countries, that was all about rent seeeking. They wanted to grab the natural resources and get all of the natural resource rent which was just like land rent. uh as Ricardo described in chapter two of his political principles of political economy uh that was developed uh right after the Napoleonic wars ended uh to outline what Britain had to do to uh now get rid of the corn laws, get rid of the agricultural protectionism, get rid of the power of landlords over the government to have parliamentary reform to essentially uh support industrial capitalism against these vested interests. Well, the classical econ economists had a solution. Even if foreign investors retain foreign ownership of the natural resources, governments have the ability to pass a tax on economic rent on unearned income in as distinct from wage income and industrial profits. uh Markx considered industrial profit an element of value because the industrial capitalist did play a role in production. The industrialist organized production, developed markets, uh did all sorts of things in uh of actions in order to uh compete with rivals abroad and to create markets for themselves uh throughout the world. Uh it was uh but in order to continue to compete, in order to become really competitive, whether it was against their will or not, industrial capitalism had to evolve into socialism. And not only Markx thought that, everybody in the late 19th century thought that they were going to see socialism of one form or another. There was Chris, as we've said before in the earlier shows, while Richard was in France, there was uh Catholic socialism, Christian socialism, uh non-Marxist socialism. Uh there were all forms but uh the there was general idea that you needed a mixed economy, an increasingly active government public sector alongside private production in order to uh prevent uh the monopolists and the landlords and the bankers from uh from the rent seeeking that would have prevented industrial economies from being uh productive. Well, uh the same what uh the BRICS countries would need and uh I didn't mention banking before, but the BRICS countries would need to do what China has done. have banking create money and credit, not uh simply to make profits by taking over industrial companies and creating monopolies as the mother of trusts. uh and backing uh opposing land taxation because uh they they they want uh landlords to make enough uh money in and o order to pay the government uh interest on the mortgage uh credit that enables new buyers of of the land. Well, uh, so the the key that China has made that the BRICS countries uh need to emulate is keeping banking as a public monopoly. uh a public creation of money and credit so that it will be used to finance actual industrial and agricultural and government infrastructure investment not uh predatory uh behavior such as the banks of uh Europe were doing well this fight was fought out in Germany in the 19th century uh but as uh the banks fought back at any rate This classical concept of value and price and rent and the the use of value theory to say to define economic rent is unearned income that uh economies needed to get rid of is is a precondition not only for capitalism but for socialism as well and that's what make what that is essentially the task of the bricks economies today I think and look not understanding this if I could had Nemo not understanding this leads you into the following conundrum. The denunciation in the west of China is precisely that the Chinese are doing for example with their credit system what Michael just described. They are not allowing it to function as though it were in some way equivalent to industrial capitalism. It's not going to be privately owned. It's not going to be driven by some narrow definition of whatever you call profit and maximizing and none of that. It's going to solve the social problem which for them has been not being the poorest country on earth but becoming a a decent modern middle inome c country which they have accomplished in one generation. Nobody has ever done that before. But the denunciation of them is a is a double irony. It misses what is their success and it guarantees the failure of the west because it can't do that. It has no way to mobilize its resources in a comparably focused way on economic growth and so it will lag behind leading to all the troubles. We read this morning in the press that the United States government has decided there are yet other kinds of equipment it will not allow American companies to sell to China. That's not going to stop the process. It misunderstands the structural issue. It will be as big a failure as going to war in the Ukraine has proved to be or the war in Vietnam proved to be or the war in Iraq proved to be. You're not thinking clearly not because you aren't smart but because you took that that labor theory of value which was developed again because Michael said it and so few people understand it. It was developed not by Karl Marx but by Adam Smith. I mean, and there were other precursors beyond that, but Adam Smith and David Ricardo. Markx took it in a different direction for sure, but he owed it to them, which was a debt. He acknowledged in those books that Michael referred to, the theories of surplus value, where he says over and over again what an important breakthrough it was when Smith and Ricardo got their hands on that labor theory of value. And what what Michael is saying, we have to read the history of economics differently because it's crucial to getting our ourselves straightened out in where we are today. My debt a little different from Michael. My debt is to an to a French philosopher named Luis Altusair whose most important publication virtually unknown in the United States is a book in French called Leo Capita which translates into English reading capital and he meant by capital the book he and he comes as a philosopher and says what is this book doing? What is the problem this book addresses? What is the project? And in his own language, which is a philosopher, he was a professor of philosophy. What his language is is different. But what he reaches is a conclusion charmingly parallel to what Michael opened us up today with that that rendition. He says, "Look at what they're trying to do. This is what? Oh, and then he opens up and if you read this stuff in Altus and then you go back and you say you have that Eureka moment, that's what this book is about. It's not about this or that detail. It's about a different way of understanding what's going on. And that, by the way, if you want to know why Marxist capital isn't taught in the United States, it's because it's a different way of understanding what's going on. And it's very important for this system not to have that publicly discussed, publicly explored, criticized. That's all fine. Find shortcomings in it. There are plenty of them there. That's not This is not a loyalty game. This is a game of saying what kind of a society would enable the achievement of scientific breakthroughs which it then buries. What kind of a bizarre society must we be living in to do that? It's not something to be proud of. It's something to scratch your head and wonder why. Well, Adam Smith today would be called a Marxist. uh because he uh urged uh changing around the tax system to tax the landlords and not uh uh not uh labor and capital. Uh remember he uh he accused businessmen of seeking monopolies. Uh and if you're uh you want uh to prevent that well with anti- monopoly legislation that's called Marxist. Almost every reform that the uh classical economists urged to free market is called Marxist today. So what are Richard and I to do that the only uh pe uh uh students who are being taught economics are being taught economics by Marxist professors. That's the only exposure that they get to what Adam Smith and John Stewart Mill and Ricardo and even uh uh Thomas Mthos actually were were talking about the whole strategy of industrial capitalism uh was summarized by Markx and uh that strategy uh as we've been discussing is very embarrassing to the rent seekers who say no no no don't don't say that uh uh landlords don't uh uh earn their money. Uh it's true that uh landlords don't just receive rent in their sleep as John Stewart Mill said. They play an active role. They decide who to rent to and they pay lobbyists to help the government understand that uh rent is productive and that's why our GDP accounts and our national income accounts count as a contribution to product and it's not a product and Markx is very clear. He distinguished uh the production economy and product and consumption from the uh unproductive economy, the circulation economy. uh the same thing uh uh that uh other uh uh other economists who criticized monopolies, the the German reformers who uh industrialized uh banking and wanted to prevent banking from playing an unproductive role. uh but as uh what happened after World War I is that instead of what Markx expected uh and what he described in volume three of capital instead of uh banking being industrialized industry was financialized and that became a counterrevolution in the sense of against the uh revolution in value price and rent theory that had guided industrial capitalism. That's the way of thinking. If you think of ve of price as the in uh the unnecessary excess of economic rent over uh value as the necessary cost to production that leads you to strip away all of the special privileges that landlords have that monopolists have uh and that uh other rentse seeeking people have. you have a free market in the classical sense of Adam Smith and Marx and uh and Richard and and me, not the uh the Hayak theory that well you you want freedom is to get rid of government. Uh if if industrial capitalism led to a government strong enough to tax away economic rent, strong enough to take monopolies into the public domain to produce basic needs and basic services as public services to be subsidized and provided freely like education instead of having to charge for it, like transportation, like medical care and public health. Well, all of these were uh conservative policies in the 19th century. Uh Benjamin Draeli said health, health is everything. Uh Draeli and the classical economists would not support uh Obamacare and the uh the enormous uh overhead of uh health care in the United States. Uh this is this is what really distinguishes uh the kind of economic reform that industrialism promised but failed to achieve because it failed to uh prevent this intellectual counterrevolution that was sponsored by the political counterrevolution of the landlords and bankers and monopolists fighting back against uh the industrialists idea of a low price efficiently econom. economy and so it was left to socialist China to streamline this and we've seen the difference in practice. Let me show you how this works out folks. The most successful investor in the United States over the last half a century is a man named Warren Buffett. He recently retired. He he is an elderly gentleman now uh a billionaire etc. And he was always asked throughout his career one question. Why are you so successful? Why uh in his uh Berkshire Hathaway corporation did he assemble the right shares of stock at the right time uh to become a multi-billionaire blah blah blah. And he he never hesitated to answer his answer. Yes. the language of uh of economics that he's used to. He said, "I always focus my investment uh as follows. I look for a company," and now his language that has a dominant position in its market. Okay, that's a nice way of saying a monopouist, somebody who's in a position to jack the price of whatever it is they produce way above what it costs and to then parcel out that wonderful revenue to whoever made it possible. But he's that's what he did. So he invested based on the hunger for monopoly in modern capitalism and he made a lot of money because he bet correctly that those companies in a position to dominate a market that is to charge more than the cost of reproducing whatever it is is where you want to be to collect the money in the way this capitalism runs. Wow. That's why he's big in banking. He's big in insurance. He's big in all those things. Railroads that have an effective monopoly on the where they run. Those are the things he's made his ton of his money on. Uh it's it's an illustration of what Michael is trying to say. And a society that does that is siphoning wealth away from economic development to sustaining these special groups. And that's what Adam Smith and Ricardo hated about the feudal landlords. They siphoned away wealth emerging out of feudalism that couldn't be used to develop the English or French economies because it was being spent in the frivolous consumption craziness of that period of French time. I just came back from France. If you travel along the Lir River, which is in in not so far from Paris, you can see the extraordinary mansions and chateau that were built with this enormous surplus that was taken away from industrial production in order to produce one grand household after another along the Lir River as it runs from the middle of the country to the Atlantic Ocean. It it's extraordinary um the insights you get from this and then the the irony of China one more time by being excluded from the west by being told you're a communist country so you're the poorest country on earth we're not going to help you and you're going to stay the poorest country on earth because you're not joining in the capitalist growth system. That's what was literally told to them uh in the late 40s and early 50s. Being excluded was the best thing that ever happened to them. By being forced not to rely on the West, they were able to limit, not to do, by the way, only limit. They have their problems too. But they were able to limit the loss of all of that wealth from the job of economic development. They kept it there and that that has made all the difference and nothing will change in that process. We will continue to see the GDP of China grow two to three times faster than the US which has been the case in every one of the last 30 years. which is a stunning achievement which any serious economics profession would make as its number one object. If Adam Smith's great book was the wealth of nations and to account for why the wealth of one nation was a hell of a lot more than the wealth of another, that would be the issue today. Why is the wealth of China exploding relative to that of every place else? Well, one thing that China had that the industrial nations of of Europe didn't have was a strong enough government to prevent a independent oligarchy, a financial oligarchy uh and its associated landlord oligarchy and monopolist oligarchy from developing. Well, that the reason was when China had a revolution, they didn't have they got rid of the financial class. the financial class and the landlord class all fled to Taiwan or left the country or essentially was socialized out of existence. That didn't happen in the west and that was the failure. The west uh the western economies by the late 19th century by the Austrian school by the American school and by the whole uh right a counterrevolution uh against government said we don't want a strong government. government is the oppressor. Well, what they meant was that government uh is blocking the landlord class and the monopolist class and the financial class. uh but they convinced uh the population and today the so-called free market uh advocacy that you're having in the United States by uh Donald Trump, Musk and the Republicans joined by the Democrats is that government bureaucracies are less efficient than uh than private monopolists and private uh capitalists. Well, they're not really capitalists in the sense of industrial capitalists uh as it was understood in the 19th century. They are uh essentially financial uh managers who've uh taken over uh industry and taken over government uh to steer government along uh financialized uh lines. and the the the the it was the banking interests that have backed uh the real estate interests in opposing a real estate tax. Uh and they've uh done this because they know that all right there's still uh land rent being paid but it's not being paid to landlords anymore. It's being paid to banks in the sense of uh a new uh anyone who buys uh borrows money to buy a home has to pay the uh the land rent that's most of the value of uh real estate homes and commercial buildings today uh uh to the banks. And if you look down who are the recipients of economic rent today, it turns out that it's the banking in the financial sector. And so what we're in is something that neither uh Marx nor uh other socialists before Lenon recognized that uh we're in a financial capitalist society today, not an industrial capitalist society. Markx expected in uh industrial capitalism to evolve into socialism but it was hijacked by the rontier interest turning it into finance capitalism and that is what has led to de-industrialization of uh United States of Western Europe and that is essentially the object lesson that I think that the British countries need to f to look at to say what is it that we want to to avoid. We want to avoid foreign investors and private owners, whether they're domestic uh oligarchy, client oligarchy or uh foreign investors from taking our natural resource rent. Natural resources are create created by nature for free. There's no cost to production and therefore no value. and to try to uh benefit from o uh if you're making a mine from more than the capital expenditures that you're creating and digging an oil well and uh creating a mine uh you're getting all of this natural resource rent that is unne unnecessary that can be taxed away for the and that it would be what would enable the BRICS governments to uh be able to have the money to build their own domestic infrastructure to replace the privatized infrastructure to create an economy that is a streamlined economy uh and uh is based on the economics of production that would be used to raise living standards, to raise productivity, to raise education, uh to uh lower the cost of uh living and uh create what was the original capitalist promise and became the socialist promise that was fought against by the anti-industrial revolution that occurred as Richard said in the late 19th and early uh 20th century and essentially had replaced industrial capitalism alto together in the wake of World War I. If I could conclude this conversation and go back to Adam Smith, he warned us and by the way Mark repeated it later. He warned us that if you leave the capitalist structure the way it is, the way the capitalists think and function, they will make that transition that we have been criticized. They will make the move from being an industrial capitalist focused on earning a profit by producing something to looking for the monopoly position in which you can make money while you're sleeping. It's much less arduous. You become instead of the living organism making the wealth, you become the parasite that sits and simply consumes the wealth and loses the interest in it. The ultimate guar here's the irony. The ultimate guarantee of what the early capitalist imagined a capitalist driven by competition to make the most surplus and plow it back into the business to grow. That image is undercut by the by the employer employee relationship. That was Marxist brilliant. The what he called the relations of production in the end go from being a means to grow wealth to becoming a fetter holding back the growth of wealth. So what would be the guarantee that you wouldn't move from a appropriating this surplus to a parasite? The answer is get rid of the contradiction between the employer and the employee. Their interests are not the same. The employees understanding what Mark taught them. If they become their own employer, then they can be sure not to take it in that wasteful social direction. And having the workers become themselves the employer, that's socialism. That's why Markx not as some mystical predictor of the future. Markx didn't believe, you know, predicting the future is something that the the the the people in the amusement park do. That's not a serious business. None of us knows what the future is. That's why we call it the future. When Markx talked like that, he was working out the logic of the system. The guarantor of socialism is that the internal contradictions of capitalism that he spent his life trying to figure out precluded not just the delivery of liberty, equality, and fraternity. It precluded the perpetuation of the capitalist system itself. And when he figured that out, he bequeafd to the rest of us a notion not only of how capitalism works, but how and why it will pass out of existence at which point one of its products Marxism will disappear too. I mean who who achieves such insight? You know that's what Aluser in France is what he marvels at. Look at this. This is an analysis which can account for the passing of the object of the analysis and then of the analysis too. It's extraordinary and it really underscores what Michael and I have the problem that he he said we face. We're trying to explain to our fellow economists what it is they are missing. But being educated the way they have, they can't hear us. So we are yelling, we're we're speaking in a situation where there's just frustration all around. But then again, maybe we shouldn't complain because if I learn anything from my fellow Americans every day in the street, we're all wondering what the hell is going on because none of the old rules and seem to be in place. Each day's headlines are more bizarre than the ones before. Anyway, I have to go. So, my apologies. I am very glad to be back in this conversation. Uh I learned a lot from what we are trying to puzzle through here. Uh so I look forward very much to the doing it again next week. See you soon. Thank you Richard. There's a reason why economists don't hear us and that is uh we are not uh on the uh mainstream media or television. We are not asked to com uh to comment on uh in polite company. were on Nemoth's show uh and uh often others. This is this is uh basically our our vehicle and uh what we're getting back to uh what Richard said. He said that Adam Smith uh forecast what would happen if the uh industrial uh hope of getting rid of uh the landlord class and its economic rent didn't work. Ricard, it was Ricardo who was the bank spokesman in parliament uh in Britain who uh gave an even more dramatic description saying that u as uh the population increased and uh demand for housing and agricultural land uh and uh real estate uh increased then more and more of the national income would be used to pay the uh uh the landlords until the entire economic surplus over and above beer subsistence would be paid to the landlord class and that would mean the end of industrial capitalism. Uh next week I I can read you the passage uh from uh what Ricardo said uh so dramatically. But uh in fact uh what Ricardo didn't criticize of course was the financial class because he was the lobbyist for the banking class of England. And uh what uh we've been discussing on this uh show for the last uh more than six months is how more and more of the uh national income of the United States and Europe has been paid as debt service to the fin to the financial sector up and up. Every recovery since World War II has uh started from a higher and higher debt level. And uh now uh almost all of the income uh of over and above subsistence for more and more of the wage earners is paid to the banks is interest, credit card interest, mostly mortgage interest if they have a home. uh but otherwise uh is uh in the form of economic rent that the uh buyers of real estate who borrowed the money uh from the banks to obtain uh uh land rent and uh have uh essentially uh paid as interest. uh interest uh on their uh automobile debt, on their personal loans that they've had to take out in order to break even because they're not paid enough money in their uh wages to pay for the basic cost of living. So what the uh the destiny that Adam Smith and Ricardo warned would occur if you don't tax away economic rent and they were thinking of the landlords uh is actually now being taken by the banking sector that plays the role today that landlords paid in the 19th century. So as you read the uh economics of Marx and uh uh John Stewart Mill and the other economists then uh you you can realize ah yes now it's the bankers that are the main rent recipients and as the main run recipients they oppose taxing economic rent and using it as a tax base. They advocate tax labor and industry, not our client uh real estate interests, not our client monopoly interests. Uh and that is what has uh essentially de-industrialized the United States. And the task of the BRICS countries is how do we avoid this? How do we avoid the power of the international financial institutions, the World Bank, the IMF and uh the American uh National Endowment for Democracy engaging in regime change to prevent us from taking steps uh to achieve a streamlined economy in which the economic surplus is used to increase production, increase employment, increase build more factories and in improve agriculture and raise the uh standard of living in labor. So uh better educated, better clothed, better housed labor can underell the labor of the popper indust countries. The popper labor countries have become the United States, Germany, and Europe, which were supposed to be the leading industrial con companies. They're the it's the uh it's the American and German and European labor that is now being popularized by finance along with real estate and along with the monopoly rentse seeeking interest uh is is distinct uh from uh China and uh other Asian countries that are trying to reinvent the wheel and what uh I think what uh Richard and I have tried to do is provide them with the concepts of value, price and rent that would guide their policy and freeing society from the rent. That in implies a government strong enough to do this. uh and it's the ta object of finance capitalism to prevent a strong uh a strong uh uh government able to do this and to capture the government to make it strong on behalf of the financial sector on behalf of the rent seekers exactly what uh Britain, France and other European countries spent a century in trying to reform. Uh and all of this actually culminated in a constitutional crisis in England in uh uh uh 1909 1910 when uh the British Parliament actually passed the land tax and u the House of Lords rejected it and uh the uh the crisis lasted a year and Britain passed a rule uh saying that uh never again. Could the House of Lords reject a revenue act by the House of Commons? Well, after uh by that time it passed, the world was on the way to World War I and national emergencies and all of that wiped out this whole drive to free economies from rent and create a free market classical economic style. Uh and uh replace it with a free market was free for the Rontier to prevent governments from blocking their takeover and grinding economies to a halt. That's the long that was uh the laws of motion that uh that occurred and Markx in his introduction to capital said my job is describing the laws of motion of capitalism. Well, the laws of motion today are not the laws same laws of motion that Marx described way back then. uh he was overly optimistic as to uh what he hoped industrial capitalism would would end up uh doing. And uh we're trying to uh refocus attention on these laws of motion to guide the policy that we would like to see uh the BRICS countries uh apply because we don't see much of a prospect for it being applied in the United States and Europe uh where the neoliberals have taken a strangle hold on on government and used it for the exact opposite purpose that the original classical economists and indust ustrialists of uh Europe and America had hoped to see. Yeah, great. Michael, we are going to continue these discussions that are so much important in my opinion when it comes to the breaks and the future of brakes and the global south and what they can learn from the United States, from the western economy, from what you've been mentioning for various sessions that we're talking here on this podcast. Thank you so much, Michael. Well, we've got to thank you for sponsoring us and giving us this uh uh this arena uh for for us to introduce these concepts that uh uh the we're not able to uh introduce to the academic uh curriculum uh in these countries. Thank you. See you soon, Michael. See you next week. Bye bye.