Hi everybody. Today's Thursday, December 4th, 2025, and our dear friends Richard Wolf and Michael Hudson are here with with us. Welcome back, Rich and Michael. >> Good to be here. Nice to be here. >> Please subscribe and hit like button, helping us reaching more people. And follow Richard and Michael. You see, you can see below the their names the website democracyatwork.info. You can go to Richard's YouTube channel as well, the same name, democracyatwork, and you can follow Michael on his website, michael-hodson.com. And let me start, Michael, with you and the situation with the Europeans. And you know, we know what's going on in Ukraine. We've been talking about the conflict in Ukraine, but the economy of Europe is not doing great. In your opinion, if Europe's main economic problems stem from political decisions, especially its alignment with the United States foreign policy, can the EU avoid further fragmentation without fundamentally rethinking its geopolitical strategy? >> Well, that's exactly the point, Nema. On the surface, Europeans problems are economic, but at root they are political and in fact they're so political that uh Europe seems to be on a destructive uh death march. Uh the past summer you've seen a constant threat of legal backout for the European breakup of the European Union uh as a result of their uh pol the leaders trying to confiscate Russia's uh 200 uh billion plus uh euros that it held in in Belgium. Well, Belgian tried to stop that and uh other countries have tried to stop that. And so the uh EU leadership uh over and above the elected uh of uh heads of state uh Macron and Starmer and Merittz uh you have Vond and Dalis and uh they they said well there's a fallback position uh if we can't just confiscate the money and uh turn it over to Ukraine meaning turn it over to our own military-industrial companies to make arms for Ukraine let's uh just pledge it as collateral for a loan from the European Central Bank. Well, the European Central Bank says, "Well, you're going to pledge collateral that has zero chance of ever being collected uh in practice. Uh because uh first of all, the Ukraine that emerges won't be the Ukraine to which the uh International Monetary Fund and the United States and Europe and private bond holders have been giving money. Uh secondly, the western Ukraine which is going to be what's left of Ukraine uh will be so devastated uh that it has no ability to pay the debt. Uh and so uh all of this is fal fictitious capital uh and it's it's uh creating a kind of operational fiction that would enable Europe to somehow uh fund continual war in Ukraine. So the what's political behind this is Europe is committed to refighting World War II and this time uh England and France have joined Germany and saying we're going to defeat Russia this time while maybe Japan and China uh can take on themselves. They lost World War II, but they say there is no alternative to paraphrase Margaret Thatcher. uh and they are absolutely committed to the cold war despite uh the voters and uh the to the extent that a few a few days ago uh the Europeans passed the law the EU passed the law that by November of 2027 there will be no importation of Russian gas or oil by any EU member. Well, already Hungary has threatened to uh s go to the EU courts and try to block this, saying their own energy security is threatened and they must have energy security, meaning continued trade uh with Russia and the East, Kazakhstan, and pipelines that go through uh the enemy. So, uh, Europe is continuing to threaten, uh, Russia and, uh, the you you've seen your commentators on your show and explaining how Russia said, uh, when, um, we, if the weapons and missiles come from a European country or made by a European country and simply are fired from Ukraine, that's an attack by the European country. Our war with Europe will be different from the war with Ukraine. Ukraine is surgical. That was the word that Putin used. We're not trying to destroy Russianspeaking donuts and Luhansk and the other uh western Ukraine. We're trying to preserve it so there'll be something left and we're going to have to rebuild it after we make sure that we will never be attacked by attack by Ukraine again. Europe says, "Well, Ukraine needs the security of our ability to attack you." Uh, so of course we're going to support Ukraine. And the British uh advocate, the British uh puppet that it wants to replace Zalinsky with, the other Z uh Zushni, however you pronounce his name, says, "Well, e, even if there's a ceasefire, we're going to fight a partisan war against Russia. we're going to fight a terrorist war and that's going to go on. Well, at a certain point, the path at which Europe is taking is going to uh result in a war that uh Putin has said it'll be very short and there will be nobody to negotiate with when it's over. So, why is the EU doing this? And if you answer this political question, you'll explain the EU's economic self-destruction. uh the aim is to employ the one industrial sector that Europe may keep growing and that's the military sector. The problem is that the EU and especially uh Britain is not producing anything that the rest of the world needs to buy uh at least at any competitive price. So, how on earth is Europe going to uh employ it its industrial labor force? Well, the only thing that it can do is employ them in the arms making industries. And if you look at the European stock market, the only stocks that are going up are the military industrial stocks. Well, the problem is that these uh military arms are not really for exports. We've already seen that they don't work in Ukraine. uh the tanks don't work well, the missiles uh can easily be shot down. They're only for domestic use. So instead of having European and especially German industry produce industrial goods to exports to balance Europe's uh international payments with the United States and the rest of the world to keep the euro's exchange rate u stable. uh you're only producing industrial goods for selfuse for essentially uh military products that either will be destroyed in the act of war or simply will sit US style being unused and accumulated but having enriched the uh military comp uh companies. So only the European countries can use the fighter planes and the drones and the guns and the missiles and the bombers and the tanks, personal characters and uh ammunition. this is uh not a an a possible allocation of resources that is going to support European growth because it's going to need somehow foreign money and uh the EU is not doing this and in fact the EU is not even uh changing its tax system to uh impose taxes on the automatic uh intelligence the the uh high technology Silicon Valley type companies uh that are operating uh via the EU and in fact uh the because the EU is unable to participate in this whole artificial intelligence revolution because it uses electricity and uh the uh Wall Street Journal had an article yesterday December 3rd uh saying green energy push in Europe backfires. And so the whole article says uh what is causing Europe's energy problem is the fact that it's tried to go green. It's tried to go use wind power and solar power as its energy and that's just been so expensive that that's what's causing its de-industrialization. There is not a word in this article about well uh the power shortage and cost going up is a result of the not importing Russian uh energy uh anymore. The the report says Germany now has the highest domestic electricity rates in the developed world. uh and it blames this as I said on uh the fact that it's tried wind energy and solar energy. German electricity costs 38.6 cents a kilowatt hour. That's against 25 cents in Poland, 16 cents in the United States, and just 13 cents in Canada. Well, it means that German employers have to pay uh four times as much for electricity as American uh and Canadian uh producers. And it means they have to pay their workers uh a high enough wage for the quadrup for these this quadrupling of uh energy costs that in the past the EU has been subsidizing in order to uh keep its uh German and other French and Italian workers from uh having the wage squeeze that you're having in the United States. and uh the they're not willing to monetize this debt as the United States uh is. They have to they try to finance their debt by borrowing abroad. And that borrowing abroad sustains their balance of payments uh exchange rate but at the cost of having to repay it and uh turning them into a global south debter country where uh so much of their income goes to pay uh foreign debt service uh to to finance this uh import dependency and the dependency uh uh of their their government on the refusal to have the public sector do what made the industrial revolution so wealthy in the 19th century that essentially the the economy has to plunge the exchange rate has to plunge living rates has to plunge what is going to what is European labor going to do if it can't be employed to make uh the industrial goods well it it gets uh worse and worse the the US uh has insisted uh that Europe uh avoid uh any move away from fossil fuels, away from uh ga uh gas and oil because that's how America foreign policy as we've discussed before wants to control other countries. If the US can control the world's or most of the world's uh energy trade, oil and gas uh by controlling Venezuela, Iraq, uh Syria, the rest of the near east and uh isolate uh Russia, then it will maintain the ability to impose sanctions on other countries to force them to give givebacks when uh Trump comes into uh tries to negot negotiate with them. So to summarize, this poses the a big problem for Europe. It doesn't make things to export uh in the world to pay for what it's trying to import. it's become dependent uh not on Russia uh where there was a balance of trade because Russia was uh buying uh German and other European goods and accepting uh Europe investment by uh European comp companies. It's dependent on the United States which is weaponized its foreign trade and it's uh it's blocked trade with China. uh we've seen that with an experia take off. The EU says we will not permit any Chinese invest any company uh to exist that is mainly Chinaowned. China is bad. It is our enemy and we will confiscate any company that China has a minor majority interest of more than 50% just as we did next next year. China has uh protested and uh the European Union says, "Okay, uh we're not going to change our mind." Uh China says, "Well, we're not going to u obviously we're not going to give you the computer chips that uh the next area company needs to keep your automobile companies uh operating with the chips they need to handle the automatic door opening, the automatic windows, and the other electrical system." So you can just close down your employment. Uh folks, Falagen and Mercedes have already said by January they're going to have to cut back their employment. Um and uh the United States tells Europe, hold on, be willing to sacrifice your auto industry and your other industries uh for the Cold War and uh Vondan and Callus and uh Micron and Starmer and Meritz. They're all in favor of this. Uh so it's a political decision that has created what seems to be an unnecessary economic suicide and uh that there doesn't seem to be any way of uh for Hungary uh the Czech Republic or uh other opponents of this to prevent this uh this death march that Europe is on. >> Richard, jump in. Yeah, I would like to say what has been under the surface and bring it up to the surface and that is requiring us to be very honest about the gap between the political leadership of the European countries and both their industrial capitalist class and the working class. Here's what I mean. this crisis that we're talking about, all of the language of doom and gloom, the hysteria about Russia, these are self-protective acts of a defunct political class, the people who run the Starmer Mac, Merz, so you know exactly who I'm speaking of. Vander Lion, all of them, these are people grew up in and became political people during the Cold War and its aftermath. They are puppets of the United States. They always have been and they have been very well rewarded by playing that role. and a space was given to them by the United States to become wealthy in that role because it helped the United States. All of that is now over. The American empire, far from growing, is now shrinking relatively. It isn't growing very fast and it is being outmaneuvered and outgrown by the Chinese and the bricks. And that has created a cascade of difficulties. The United States as the leader of the West has been able to hold on to most of its wealth despite the decline. And how have they done that? by pushing the burden of the decline of the US empire onto those below them, onto those who have less power and wealth to hold on amidst the decline. That includes Europe. That's what the spectacle is of Mr. Trump telling the British, "You can't have access to the American economy unless you give us a tariff." and the same to the the rest of the Europeans, telling them that he has his own policy for the Ukraine, which may or may not be consistent with them. And he shows them that he has no respect at all, culminating in the last week with the meetings between the United States and Russia in which the Europeans aren't even allowed to sit there. And when they do sit there, that's what they're allowed to do, sit there. So what do we have? We have a desperate political leadership in Europe. And what it is doing is taking care of itself in the wonderful individualist mentality that the West is so proud of. So they are willing to go to war with Russia. Their careers are over. Their people are already in the process. of finding out and facing that these leaders have been unable to keep up with the rise of China and the bricks as the new power in the world economy have hitched their wagon to the United States which is a declining relative power in the world and have maintained their slavish relationship to the United States even as the United states kicks them in order to hold on to its own relative wealth and that Vanderlayan comes to the United States and commits if the tariffs are only 15% and not 30% they will buy natural gas as at Michael pointed out three times the cost of Russian oil and gas and they will commit to invest hundreds of billions of dollars in the United states. These are economies that are in trouble if they kept that investment at home, but they're going to do it in the United their people will not permit it. And that's coming now closer and closer. You even have the capitalists watching their industries be decimated, beginning to meet and talk to each other both inside the European countries and with their counterparts in the United States because all of them are a little worried that the politicians are holding on to what is not a sustainable deal. They can't control the Chinese. So, a major player is beyond their control. Now, they're watching the reactions in Europe and America that make the problem for them worse. You can begin to see them talking to each other secretly, if they can get away with it, trying to come up with some plan that has a better outcome. the leaders of Europe pushing now this talk of armaments of confronting Russia uh transforming Putin into Stalin so the whole game can be done again. This is the only way for them to deflect and distract public opinion inside Europe away from their colossal blunders, their colossal subordination at their own expense. The way Michael laid it out correctly, they are going to be blamed. They know it and I know it and everybody who pays attention knows it. All that's left for them is the kind of hysterical behavior. Kali Kalas said last week in a way that the whole world started laughing. She attacked Russia for having attacked Europe 19 times in recent history while Europe has never attacked Russia. No Napoleon in her words. No Hitler in her li in her. She's so far gone. You know, it's not important that it's her or what she says, but when an official in that position has to talk crazy like that, you know, you're at a certain point when the rest of her allies do not do something to offset the lunacy because they're busy nodding. That's because the demonization of Russia is the only political story they have left. So, they're going to tell it and repeat it and provoke incidents around it because that's that's their dying commitment. And it is true that for the working class and ironically for the capitalists too, this is too short term a politics. They need to live in the longer term. They don't care to preserve their political careers of Starr and Macron and Meritz. These are minority candidates. Uh Starmer is is is only in there because of the crazy incompetence of the conservatives that gave him an election he cannot reproduce. So I think that's what we're w and we should point the finger if others are not yet ready to do it. let the people on the left point the finger at this colossal failure in Europe and to say to the Europeans, you better get rid of this kind of political mentality, this kind of leadership and and start a new way. And finally, the spectacle of this money, the the money you stealing from Russia because you don't like its politics, because you're going to save the political career of these, you know, defunct leaders. And and and in that process and in that process, the um I'm sorry I for that interruption. In that process, you're going to defend a leader that that cannot get you out of this mess that you're in. Stealing money is the wonderful in you're stealing money from from Russia. That is a message to every other country that keeps its assets in Western banks that it is risky in a way they had not thought possible from now on and will be even worse if they do any of the silly things they talk about. And they know that there's a reason the Belgian government says this is not going to happen because they're on tap because of the euro clear being based in Belgium. They're the ones that are going to get sued and they know they may lose and they and they don't want to win or lose. They don't want this to happen. They want to continue getting the benefits of being where the money is deposited. They don't want to lose that. And in the long run, that's Europe's not it's not in the interest of Europe to become the place you don't put your money anymore. And the people who run Europe know it. And this is a political ploy desperate to hold on so Vander Lion can pretend that she's an important person in world politics, which she never was. But now they have taken the Europeans in a direction that will come to haunt them all. And that is again why both the working class in its way and the capitalists in their way are figuring out a little late in the game that they have to make big changes in Europe and they will and those politicians we are talking about now will fade into history really soon. Well, Richard, you and I have both emphasized uh how the problem stems from the US starting the new cold war after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. But this anti-Russian policy is uh I think it's you've just said not merely a US policy. It's a European policy of the former not basically it's the former Nazi party policy. uh and that has a European genesis uh quite independently from the United States uh and it's this surviving uh European Nazi genesis in the family background not only of but of merits and uh uh coupled with the Baltic uh states hatred of Russia for the uh traumatic occupation that occurred there just as it occurred in Eastern Europe. Eastern uh uh Germany. But still it the problem is mainly Europe's result of all of this is throwing on its uh hatred of Russia with the sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh shared uh US uh cold war wish to attack Russia and uh it believes that somehow in the past the United States is going to support it in all of this and it thought well we will always have our economy supported because we are fight We are the uh essentially army foreign legion of the United States uh fighting uh Russia primarily. We're on the grounds. So if uh just as the Ukraine is going to be fighting to the last Ukrainian, we're going we're willing to fight to the last European industry and maybe even the last Europeans if indeed we're going to have a military war against Russia. Well, this uh A week ago, the Financial Times uh published an op-ed by Martin Sandbu uh showing the reaction to all this. This the his op-ed was called Europe needs a plan for decoupling from America and uh pointing to the surrender of by Vondan and to Trump's tariff demands that you pointed out for uh a European give back in the sense of you know what's it going to do to agree to fight China to not trade with China to uh trade with the collapsing declining US market instead of the growing Chinese and uh East Asian market. Sandro wrote, "It should be done. It should be clear that building one's livelihood on US sales is ever more of an opportunity of a liability and less of an advantage. European exporters may find themselves locked out of markets the next time the White House wants to export something." Well, he says, and I agree, that the EU needs to protect itself by moving away from dependence on US markets for its exports because Trump has weaponized these. Trump says, well, we now insist that you export more and that you invest more in the United States. So the United States is now uh holding uh European companies in the United States essentially hostage. Uh Europe has to agree to pay tribute to the United States by making loans and investments to US companies and it has to uh re uh shift its trade patterns away from the east toward the United States. And uh that's the give back that uh Vonda and with her the entire US um the entire EU foreign policy has committed to they it's the entire EU that is uh Vondlayan it's not her it's the entire uh EU political leadership that is as you put it decoupled from what the voters want. uh this is something that inherently cannot survive politically without a police state and indeed that's what uh the EU in and Britain are moving into with their attempt to ban parties that are such as the alternative for Deutseland that are trying to uh stop the war with uh Russia and saying is it really worth sacrificing our own industrial and economic growth and living standards just to hurt Russia. And the EU leadership, yes, says yes, it is. We hate Russia more than we wish to protect our own economy. It's all about the hatred with this historical root. And it's not only Napoleon and Hitler. It's Britain in the Crimean War. And before that, Sweden attacking Russia. Uh Poland attacking Russia. The I think uh the uh Russian leadership has run may run down the whole list of Western European attacks on Russia. And they say we we've finally got the message. uh you uh find your uh what you call western civilization incompatible with that of Russia and Asia and the rest of the world. uh and you insist on unipolar leadership under which you are the loyal uh servants of uh US neocons uh in exchange for your hope that somehow the United States will protect uh your growth even though now Trump has pulled the rug out from under your economies uh and uh they're they're lost in this past they they cannot accept the reality Because as you put it, it means the end of their careers, but it also means the end of their ideology. The ideology of Europe must uh dominate the world and uh uh somehow create the whole rest of the world as its empire as uh Britain did in India and uh other Asian countries as Germany did in Africa as Belgium did in Africa as France did in North Africa and central Africa. Uh all of this uh is uh 19th century uh colonialism uh drawing these countries into the Sterling area, the Frank area, the monetary and financial and economic systems of uh Western Europe is to be applied now first to Russia and then to China. This is a world view. This is uh an uh their objective. it's actually what they think uh they can still accomplish despite the fact that the fighting uh in Ukraine as an arena for the fight of Europe and the United States against Russia and behind it China is uh has shown that uh Europe cannot possibly win and the stakes now are so high that what's at stake is the physical and military and demog graphic survival uh of Europe itself. Well, you can just see look at what's happened in the last few days. Uh the US informal envoys Steven Vitkov and Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner uh ended their discussion uh with Russia that obvious Russia said, "Well, there are things that uh we can agree with and there are a lot of things we don't agree with." Uh and before the talks, Vitcov and Kushner said, "Well, we're going to stop off in Europe, uh I think it was Portugal, and meet with Zalinski and the Europeans to consult with them and tell them what's happening." When the talks were over, Vitcov and Kushner said, "Well, I guess there's really no point in talking to uh Zalinsky and the Europeans. The Russians convinced them that there that they have no role to play whatsoever." And so uh the American uh informal team were flying directly back to Washington after making a call to Trump. And uh uh neither Trump nor the American team nor uh uh the US media have revealed anything that was said at the discussions in the last few days because it's just so embarrassing. Russia said, you know, we've said it before, there's not going to be a ceasefire until we uh defeat Ukraine, set up a government that is not neo-Nazi uh and a court system to hold new Nuremberg trials to punish the Nazis who did all of this and then uh the it's true that Ukraine will western what survives of Ukraine will be broke. But Ukraine does have a source of income that you haven't mentioned. Ukraine can sue Europe and the United States for uh organizing the Maidan coup d'eta of 2014 of arming the uh of imposing uh a foreign backed government that has uh led to the mass killing of Ukrainian uh men and a few women too. uh in the feudal fight against Russia uh undermanned, understaffed uh with inferior weapons uh that were just sort of dumped on on Ukraine, many of which didn't even work. Uh Ukraine has a the ability to say this wasn't us who destroyed it. This was Europe and the America. These were European arms. These uh we didn't steer the missiles. These were Americans in Vbaden and the British in Vbaden who were steering the missiles to decide uh where to hit in in Russia. We were only the arena and uh we were the enemy just as much as Russia and in fact we suffered more than Russia because of the incompetence and the under support of uh of us in Russia. So, uh, if Ukraine wants the money, uh, to rebuild, uh, after it pays enormous reparations to Russia for its destruction of the, uh, the civilian, uh, buildings and, uh, parts of, uh, Russianspeaking uh, Ukraine, uh, after it uh, imprisons and no doubt hangs the guilty uh, pro-Nazi banderites, uh who were put in power by the European and American coup d'eta uh that began under uh Obama. Well, then uh uh we'll see what is left of uh Europe after all this. Obviously, Europe is and the United States are going to uh tie up any attempt at resolution in international courts. They'll say, "Well, we have to defend Ukraine. we have to defend Ukraine by giving it the atom bomb 24 hours later. There may be no London, Paris or uh many German cities uh if if that occurs. So that I think Putin has made that very clear. Europe has said we we agree that's okay. We're uh as long that that means that our dream has failed. And who wants to live in a Europe whose dream of world domination has failed? If we're blown up, well, that's the failure of our dream, and we might as well go with it. Uh, in a way that's the mere image of what President Putin said when America uh replied to the mutual econ uh uh military atomic destruction by saying, "Well, of course we're going to retaliate uh against the United States and Europe if they use atomic weapons against us." Who wants to live in a world where Russia is carved up and uh transformed into a different kind of society? uh you're having this attitude uh this attitude is mirrored in uh Western Europe and the United States. The difference is that uh uh Europe welcomes this self-destruction. Russia is trying to uh prevent it. That's the uh context for what's diplomatically unfolding today and in the next few months. Richard, >> what the European leadership is doing is trying and hoping that they can mine what Michael just said, a deep awareness in Europe, that their position in the world over the last 500 years can somehow be rescued, that it can be re-established, that it can be preserved. served against what looks to be the rise of China in the east and the power of the United States even in decline which is coming at their expense. The the leadership is committed because that's all they have. If they can't sell that story that we are the way to hold on, then they will be condemned and blamed for everything that happened, which isn't even fair to them since it is, as everybody says here, bigger than just these nondescript leaders. But they have certainly proven unable even to understand and teach their people anything, let alone stop it. Europe's situation has gotten worse. That's why the popularity of Starmer is in the toilet or of Macron is it. They've been in office some more, some less. Mr. Mertz is outdoing them. He's been in office less than a year and he's already, you know, collapsing in terms of the popularity. The people there know that it's not going well. Now, can he find the roots of a of a anti-slavism and or who knows what other kinds of of leftover historical sicknesses to touch base with? That's what they're trying to do. That's why Kalis talks nonsense. She has to rewrite the world history to hold on. But the question is, will the people there buy this or will they say no, we we need a a a change? And let me assure any Europeans watching, the United States, top, bottom, and middle, could care less about the Europeans. The idea of the Europeans that the United States will protect them is childishly silly. And it always was. When Mr. Trump becomes president and says, "What's so bad about Mr. Putin? Let's work something out with Mr. Putin." The Europeans get crazy. He doesn't. He understands that there might be money to be made here by some arrangements with Russia. And he's right. There might be. And the alternative hadn't seemed to work all that well. The Cold War wasn't some great success. Although I understand there's now revisionism that wants to talk as if it were, but it really wasn't. So I think that what we're watching is the death throws of the whole the European idea, the whole notion that there's something extraordinarily special about these people that gives them this dominant role. The whole notion of the global south is the demand of the people, the vast majority of people to stop being in a subordinate position to the Europeans. That's not fun for the Europeans to confront, but it is the reality. China's importance in the world is because it is carefully cultivating the alliance with the global south. Europe tried with its colonial system to do that. It failed. China does not establish colonies and it is successful. This sad reality for the west is constantly being shored up. And let let me make clear one other thing because I don't want to scare people, but let's be honest. We have had in the last few months an extraordinary exhibit. It's the exhibit of killing 85 people in boats in the Caribbean and a little bit in the Pacific. What's extraordinary about that is that there is no pretense to continue what was the policy for a hundred years. If there's a boat and you're an American naval vessel, you and you have a suspicion about the boat, you can approach the boat. You can demand the right to go on it. You can force it. And if there's drugs, you can confiscate them and you can arrest the people and you can take them to wherever they came from and turn them over to the local authorities. That's what you do. Three months ago, the president of the United States and the secretary of war decided to short circuit. They were in a rush suddenly. You know, Mr. Maduro has been in office since Chavez. So, both Chavez and Maduro have been who they are for a long time. What in the world is going on now? The drug problem in the United States is not worse than it used to be. I want to remind people that drug traffic is a crime in the United States. People are arrested for that crime all the time. And when they're arrested, they are given a lawyer. They have evidence that they can refute. They have cross-examination. They have a jury. And they have a judge. And if they are found guilty after all of that, they are given a pre prison sentence. Drug traffic is not a capital crime inside the United States. We do not execute people who are found guilty. One of those found guilty was the former president of Honduras. And he was found guilty and given a prison sentence of several years. Two weeks after he entered prison, Mr. Trump pardoned him, having been convicted of bringing millions of dollars of cocaine into the United States. This is at the same time that they executed with no trial, no jury, no judge, no lawyer, no evidence, people in a boat. All right. You you have to pay attention to this stuff. This is a declaration that the that Mr. Trump wants to take over Venezuela's oil. It's important to do that. Saudi Arabia is part of bricks. That's a problem. All right. Iran is part of bricks. China is becoming safe with its energy between Russia, the Middle East, and Venezuela. You can see how and why this has to be disrupted. No amount of violence, no amount of uh contradicting American law, international doesn't matter. So when he says, "I'm going to take Greenland," pay attention. Is it bravado? Yes. Is it Mr. Trump's over-the-top bluffery? Yes. But there's also something else going on here. And there's a kind of notion in Washington that having been unable to stop the Russians in Ukraine, because that is recognized, by the way, at the highest levels of the United States government as an utterly lost cause. The Europeans may think there's something that can be rescued there, but the people in Washington, pretty much across the board, don't think so. All right. This is then a desperate country. It is taking ext Mr. Trump creates vulnerabilities. He's being attacked right now even by Republicans for killing the people in the boats. This is stuff that is costing him politically. His numbers are going down also. So this is the United States and Europe engaged in struggles with one another in struggles internally and it's all about division and decline without anything comparable happening in the relationship for example of China and Russia or of the bricks. I mean they have their differences absolutely and conflicts that will one day be explosive no doubt but they understand the moment historically and for all of them they see themselves as a now wealthy cohesive block in the face of a desperate yes they have to worry will they be annihilated by a lunatic nuclear war that's a real concern concern, but it's a concern because the United States and Europe are in this kind of hysterical decline and that we who live here need to understand that to give ourselves the political frame within which to propose an alternative way of dealing with the issues that are coming up. >> Michael Michael and said when we talk Michael when we talk about Europe can you hear me? >> Yes. >> We talk about Germany and France what's going on with the United Kingdom that we recently see new articles coming in Financial Times talking about the UK economy is collapsing. What is happening in the United Kingdom? >> Well, I think for the last uh month we've been talking about the failure of Trump's tariff policy. uh and how it's been so destructive of the United States. Uh the inflationary impact of Trump's tariffs, especially on the raw materials such as steel and aluminum that go into everything industrial, uh have so far been muted because America had huge stocks of uh these raw materials. Now it's it's running out of them. Now suddenly you're finding the uh consequences of uh of the tariffs and a very sharp rise in prices. You're having the agricultural sector uh torn up. I think we spoke uh I spoke last week about not only is the problem the soybean trade uh that uh has been lost. There are no sufficient uh grain silos to store the soybeans in. But it's not only soybeans. It's it's uh grain and uh corn and other crops uh because the price of agricultural inputs has gone way up. the farm equipment uh prices have uh be have been so far increased by Trump's tariff on uh German and other European imports over and above the nominal tariffs just on imports coming from Europe. Trump has been taxing the steel and aluminum components of these tractors. So the farmers cannot afford new tractors. there's the market price of used harvesting equipment and tractors has gone way up. Uh so agriculture uh uh has been uh requesting government bailouts for agriculture. So uh Trump originally said, well, we're going to have tariffs and that's going to finance the budget deficit. He now has to spend billions and hundreds of billions more than he collects in tariffs in order to subsidize agriculture, industry, uh local finances in order to prevent their insolveny. So Trump has uh the effect of tariffs has been to worsen the uh budget deficit. Uh Trump has just uh in the last few days announced he's appointing a intends to appoint a personal head of the Federal Reserve pledged to flood the economy with credit, lower interest rates in order to somehow uh make it uh more possible for banks and the Federal Reserve Board to create the credit to subsidize the economy and let the government run budget deficits by paying interest quarterly to holders of uh the US federal debt at low interest rates, not high interest rates. This is leading foreign investors to uh essentially dump the uh dollar, move out of it. Uh Trump uh solution is well maybe Bitcoin maybe we can get uh uh the cryptocurrency uh held by the world's kryptocrat class and the gangster class uh to uh invest in cryptocurrency that is backed by holding US treasury uh securities. So it's all about uh the sort of circular flow uh and the America I described earlier the problems the German industry had with its high electricity costs in the United States the projected uh expansion of artificial intelligence. I think we need a new word for that. You could say non-human uh thinking or uh synthetic uh correlation analysis uh is what it should be called. All of that is going to uh create a demand for electricity that does not exist and cannot be supplied for between five and 10 years. So uh the uh same electrical electricity costs of uh homeowners to heat and light their apartments of industries to uh and businesses to use electricity is going to be uh way up. Trump's tariffs have made the American economy uncompetitive. uh and uh the result here is the same kind of desperation that you've found in Europe that I think Richard and I have used that word in the last few weeks to describe uh uh the policy here. Uh and there's uh while uh he what we've been discussing today may be extreme, it's extreme only because it's not discussed in the American press for what it is. uh and there there's been no discussion of the fact that there is an alternative or discussion of where the current trajectory is leading to the America joining the uh European death wish. And uh I want to read just one quote from what Dimmitri Medvidev said a day or two ago uh about uh the hijack attempt by Europe to hijacked American uh hijack Russian assets. He said if the crazy European does after all try to steal Russian assets frozen in Belgium under the guise of a so-called reparation loan. Russia may well view this move as tantamount to a causes belly with all the relevant implications for Brussels and individual EU countries. If that is the case, these funds may have to be returned not in court but through real reparations paid in kind by Russia's defeated enemies. Uh well remember Medbidev was the uh the for interim president of of Russia. Uh he's been expressing the sort of he's the bad cop in the uh good cop bad cop routine that he has with Putin where he says what the actual Russian feeling is toward the west and towards the United States. And uh we're in an the escalation of the conflict in the context of an American and European economy that is shrinking is going to have to be paid by the sacrifice of American industry and its employees, its labor force. uh and uh the response from uh Britain to the EU to the uh United States is that uh well we've got to balance the budget for having cut the taxes on the uh uh I use on the the rontier sector finance real estate and the monopolies for the uh high high-tech monopolies we've got to do that by ending social security in the last few days uh today's Wall Street Journal suggests uh that somehow uh you there's a way of essentially cutting the uh monthly paycheck withholding for social security and medical care in order to enable American families to survive as their electricity costs and housing costs and consumer costs go up. And what this cutting of the uh worker contributions to social security is doing in the United States is uh will uh be cited in Congress. This is a a g their game plan to say, "Oh, there's no money to pay Social Security. We're going to have to abolish it and give the money to the 1% uh because that's our philosophy." So you're uh you're you're seeing the what uh we've been discussing as an international neoc colonialist European war for dominance over the world becoming a domestic class war against labor and even against uh industry by uh the financial sector monopolies by essentially the 1% uh from the United States to Europe to to uh to Britain. Uh the this the the war will somehow bring all of this to a head and all we can see is the breakdown. There's no way right now of seeing how the where the pieces are going to end up. Uh it it will depend on what uh I think Richard and I call class consciousness. Uh is there going to be a proposal that there is an alternative? You're not seeing any of this discussed in the mainstream press. Uh I guess it's uh up to us uh on your weekly show to try to uh spell out what uh we think the alternative uh may be and how it's unfolding uh as we see this uh march forward into mutual decline. >> Richard, here's the problem. Britain's empire is gone. Britain's empire has been gone for quite a while and the little bits and pieces of it that are left were fading even as we speak. Britain made a decision like the one Europe is now facing. But it made the wrong decision. It made the decision to give up on playing any role in the world economy other than the financial center of London. And there are historical reasons why that happened. And so the result however is so obvious that you know it was known all along. You can't forever be the financial center of the world if you are no longer anything else of importance in the economics of the world. In other words, the rise of China. I can say to you now with the certainty that comes just from watching, you know, economic history, China is not just going to be good at making electric vehicles or uh, you know, solar panels or all the or AI. they're going to be running the global financial system as well because their currency is going to become or or some composite currency if they don't make the the remanb or you know the their own currency the global c they're going to take more and more of of London's business I mean it doesn't take a g you can't hold on you've got to come up with a whole new strategy the British have no new strategy. They have no new industry, no new they're not working on a new arrangement with Europe. And just to tease everybody about what Michael just said, suppose you ask the question, since Russia is the largest country on earth by geography, that we already know that beneath the soil in various parts of Russia are oil and gas and rare earths and god knows what else. Might there be a way to collaborate with the Russians on the development of all of that wealth? Look, we know the Russians are discussing that question with the Chinese and I bet you they're discussing it with the Indians. There is no reason why they couldn't discuss it with Europe and the United States. It's a different way of imagining what the relationship might be. But if the only way you're going to get access is by carving Russia up into little countries in a defeat, well then you're then you're on the path you're on. And all I could say to my European counterparts, how's that going for you recently, would you say? And the answer we all know is it's not going well for Europe. >> Yeah, exactly. >> Thank you so much, Richard and Michael. Michael, do you want to add something? >> Uh, no. It's just that when Richard said Europe has no plan, it re it doesn't have a plan, but it has an attitude. And the attitude is uh yes, uh we do want to develop Russian resources. Of course, we want it to be developed by American and European firms, and we want to uh get all of the uh natural resource rents from this, not leave it to Russians. That's what colonialism is. We get the the money, not them. It's a clash of economic systems. It's not just a clash of countries. It's not even just a political clash alone. It's a class of what how is an economy going to be organized and who's going to get the economic surplus and what will the surplus be used for. Uh this this is what the fight is to save and reshape civilization is going to be all about. >> Yeah, exactly. Thank you so much, Richard Michael. Great pleasure as always. Have a great time there. >> You too. >> [music]