the microphone. >> Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, October 30th, 2025 and our dear friends Richard Wolf and Michael Hodson are back with us. Welcome back. >> It's good to be back. >> Let me start Michael with you. What is your understanding of the meeting between the two presidents Xiinping and Donald Trump? Before going to that, let me play a clip in which they just getting together, hand shaking between the two president. It shows the tone and the atmosphere there. Good to meet you. Great pleasure to see you again. Good to see you again. >> Me, too. >> And we're going to have a very successful meeting. I have no doubt. But he's a very tough negotiator. That's not good. We know each other well. You see in the eyes of Donald Trump some sort of I don't know disappointment some sort he he doesn't receive the way that he wants to greet you know she and he didn't get the you know the the feeling from she but what's your understanding Michael when it comes to the meeting and how do you find it it was positive negative something between the two >> what is positive it's positive that China resisted giving up to the unlike Japan and Korea that totally surrendered to uh Trump's demands. You'll notice in that clip you just showed once Trump put his hand on she's back straightened sort of and put on his frozen smile. Uh so you could see that uh he uh that that sort of told the picture right now. The buildup to all of this was that it was going to be a positive meeting. And I think that uh chi China orchestrated the whole meeting to set to enable Trump not to get angry and to to do what he usually does and says the meeting is a great success. And in fact, after the meeting, Trump said on a scale of 1 to 10, this was a 12. Well, what did China as as I look at what seems to have come out? It wasn't a 12 at all. It it didn't really move forward and indeed the US plans were turned down. But she had sort of enabled Trump to get what he really wants, a public relations uh nice picture of increased soybean purchases. Okay, so this is not uh Brazil's harvest season. This is America's harvest season. Three big ships are going to be carrying soybeans. So Trump can say, "Look, farmers, I've done something for you." Uh and there are a couple of other things that modest concessions uh that uh that China made that are uh very marginal. They're concessions that weren't a sacrifice. But what Trump had wanted was what essentially America has insisted from Russia. It let's have a ceasefire. and a ceasefire. Well, let's roll back everything to the way it was before uh the tariffs. They haven't worked. Uh I realize that uh instead of isolating China, the Trump's tariffs have isolated himself from China. Uh and he said, "Well, let's go back. I'll get rid of the tariffs and we'll make things the way they were." Well, China's response is a lot of things have happened since you did the tariffs. For instance, we've uh done a mirror image. We we've adopted your policy of national security really has to play a role in our trade policy and we've imposed national security uh constraints on our exports of raw materials and other gallium and uh other elements. So that we're not going to expo export anything that can be used by your uh your military uh at all. Nothing was uh discussed about that. Uh they there was an ag Trump says well they are going to uh re relax some of their rare earth exports. But it turns out that uh what China ch according to uh the re reports here from Bloomberg and others China said yes we will relax our exports of what you need for rare earths but you'll have to re relax your controls number one you'll have to remove your constraints on uh designated companies in China your list of companies that Americans can't deal with and cannot import any products with products of these companies like Nexperia in Holland that had been that the Dutch government confiscated from China at US demands that has paralyzed the automobile car battery industry from Germany all the way to the rest of Europe. uh all uh and uh the US will have to remove its constraints on exporting high-end computer chips from Nvidia. Uh the the very high-end it can only export the uh the low uncomputer uncompetitive computer chips that the uh Chinese are now uh already cutting the Nvidia market for by I think 75% by producing their own. So, uh, these, uh, the conditions for all of these nice, uh, agreements that Trump has talked about are not going to be met by the United States because, uh, Trump has surrounded himself with anti-China hawks. They're not going to agree to anything. So, uh, Trump did most of the talking and, uh, Chi just had his usual enigmatic smile. Uh, and afterwards there's no mention of any tick- tock deal. No mention at all except that the US would roll back tariffs in exchange for China not selling drugs that could be used to make fentinyl. But the US pharmaceuticals industry is as dependent on China for its exports of chemicals and pharmaceuticals as the US computer industry is dependent on rare earth. So, uh, it it's really unlikely that China had to really give up anything at all. There may be just one or two chemicals and it'll continue to completely dominate the US market and the US dependency on China will continue. So, China has not given anything and usually there's a memorandum of agreement and the memorandum of agreement isn't really a promise because uh agreements have to be signed and uh approved by Congress and go through a long political process. No agreement at all, nothing. Uh only Trump saying the meeting was great. Well, he always says the meeting is great and when there is a press release uh of the meeting, the US press release is very different from the press release of the other side of the meeting, whether it's Russia or China or whoever. So, uh China has been closed mouth and there's no indication that it's given up anything anything at all. So that's sort of a common denominator of Trump's meetings where uh the uh the Dow Jones is up as it's been up every single day. Nvidia says, "Oh, that's great. Uh our shares are up. We're going to sell more to China." But it also said we need the Chinese market if we don't if uh Trump does not allow us to sell the very highest uh most productive rare chips to China then we won't have the money to engage in the research and development to stay ahead and we'll fall behind. That was uh what the head of Nvidia said yesterday uh at the meeting. So it looks like China has uh maintained its control. it it really hasn't given anything except some uh a few marginal uh twists that look good like the soybeans uh and and the drugs. Uh I I don't think the US is going to or Europe is going to remove the sanctions against uh uh Chinese against Chinese purchase of the Dutch uh chip chip engraving machinery. Uh and it probably won't even do anything about Nexperia. uh the Germans have said they're willing to close down their o their uh auto industry and uh just uh live with it as Germans do. So that's basically the situation. I think it was a win for China in resisting uh the giveaway the surrender that Korea and Japan gave. Richard your >> well um as I read the history of these sorts of u agreements memos um even when they do go through the political process and become uh so-called legitimate binding and all the rest that they always have two qualities that people forget. Yet the first quality is the world is finite and everything changes and whatever you agree to today can be unagreed to one way or another tomorrow. Uh the second thing is that there are always unspoken agreements that coexist with whatever is spoken or written about in press releases. The two of them, for example, may have come to some agreement about uh Tik Tok, but that includes an agreement not to talk about it for the next three months or the next six months or God knows what they might have done. They might have changed what the balance will be between the portion that basically China holds on to and the portion that the Americans have some say in because that was being negotiated and obviously that wasn't easy to resolve since they've been at it for at least 6 months if not longer and can't reach a resolution which is why as each deadline for a resolution approaches Mr. Trump says we're going to extend it another three months and stuff like that. Those are signs, not that you need them, but those are signs that beneath the surface other things are going on. So, I'm a little nervous. I understand what Michael just did, and it makes perfect sense. I'm just I don't want to hang too much on how things appear uh in the moment of the meeting. Michael is absolutely right. I've never seen Mr. Trump come out of a meeting in which he doesn't think he's just done the greatest job imaginable, won the greatest results one could hope for. I mean, it's it's clearly pathological. They had nothing to do with what actually uh happened. Now having said that I want to go back and quote Michael last week back to all of us last week or it might have been two weeks ago. Michael went through a very very good rendition uh with humor of what had happened with the deals made between the United States and South Korea on the one hand and Japan on the other in which the flim flam that we've been watching for the last eight months was exercised. Remember, you hit them with a high tariff and then you offer in return for lowering the high tariff to something less uh a deal but that it requires the commitment of hundreds of billions of dollars, say over the next five or 10 years to be invested in the United States. a deal quite similar to what was done with Ursula Vanderland you know from Europe. The same deal will lower the tariffs a little bit from what we had said. Uh but you have to promise in the case of Europe the promise was larger 750 billion in energy purchases plus 700 billion in investment. Okay, that was outrageous. And it was so outrageous that one had to ask the question that one normally kind of puts aside, what's really going on here, did they really commit? How in the world just between you and the and me and the lampost, how do the European politicians commit to stand in front of their own people and explain that they can't sustain their free education or their free transport or their subsidized housing or their national health service because they don't have the money since they're spending a fortune on American liqufied natural gas and investing in America. This this is political suicide. Even the Europeans who seem to be very good at that particular activity, even they wouldn't go that far. So my suspicion listening to Michael lay it all out was that these people are making agreements having absolutely no intention whatsoever of doing this. They have figured out and I'm going to quote Michael again. They have figured out what Michael just said about Xi Jinping. He stands there. He has, if I may quote him, an enigmatic smile. And you know, he lets Mr. Trump do what he likes to do, which is appear to be in charge, appear to be having a great time, and appear to be successful at whatever he set out to do. Let him do it. Who cares? It doesn't matter anymore. Mr. Trump won't be there three years from now and a lot of things can happen in those three years. Not to speak of what happens. Let's get sure we'll do this, we'll do that. And then when it comes to doing it, there'll be a delay. There'll be a problem. There'll be an unforeseen act aspect to it that requires new negotiations on and on. That's what you do when it is not politic to say right in his face, no, because you don't know what Mr. Trump may do when he's pressed into a corner. So, you don't you don't you've discovered this is the best way. It's very important not to aggravate the fellow. And if you need an object lesson, just watch the interactions between Mr. Trump and the Canadians there. There you'll see a nice example of why it is wiser not to to push back very much because you're going to get hurt in that process. That that's my reading that the that the South Koreans thank ICE because that absurd raid by ICE of the South Korean factory in Georgia [cough] allowed the South Koreans to back away from what they had agreed to. The Japanese must be fuming as they watch South Korea on the one hand and China on the other not give to Mr. Trump even what they've been willing to give. You know, it puts Japan in in a very very bad light along with Europe. So that's my take. I take is because it isn't working real well and because if I if I'm informed correctly, there is actually a serious chance that the Supreme Court will somehow invalidate some of the tariff business of Mr. Trump's. Uh he has to prepare for the very bad look that will give to everything he's done. So he needs some successes and so he has to go to to Asia because the great success he had a few weeks ago has unraveled on him and now he's going to shore it up with a visit and lots of photo ops. Other than that, I don't think much has changed. >> Well, Richard, you and I have a forecasting problem. We It's our materialist approach to history. We always expect uh the most logical thing for other countries to do will be to act in their own self-interest. Obviously that would not help us forecast what Germany has done uh or what uh a lot of other countries will done. And as I look at the agreements that Korea uh announced after the meetings uh with Trump, they said well we are going to give up the 350 billion. Remember the uh the prime minister of Korea said there's no way Korea can possibly pay this amount of money without essentially imposing austerity on its economy as you pointed out. Uh and it's not Japan doesn't have any m uh anywhere near that much money. But they've they said we agree to to the uh 350 billion and uh Trump spilled out that 150 billion of this that's a big chunk is going to be in building a nuclear power submarine. Okay, that China Korea expects to make a profit uh just like the militaryindustrial complex in the US will make on the submarine. So I can understand it's giving 150 billion uh to uh invest in this uh huge ship building because it has a ship building industry and America doesn't. [clears throat] Uh okay mutual mutual gain. I don't know about the three the 200 billion remaining on equity investments because as you've just pointed out it it didn't go very well in Georgia. uh and the loan guarantees. Uh I would not uh want to guarantee something that Trump is in charge of deciding who gets the money, but it looks like they've promised it. Uh they've also promised to buy more US oil. Well, okay. I think they will. Uh does that mean that they won't buy Russian oil? It does that mean that they'll look like uh end up looking like German industry? Well, maybe that's the case. But at the end you made the allimp important point. What if the Supreme Court says that uh it invalidates the tariffs that Trump has done? It says only Congress can pass the tariffs according to the Constitution. Well, is this going to uh enable other countries to negate the deal they've made? and other countries said, "Oh, we made all of this deal in exchange for cutting the tariffs." Uh, and now that there aren't any tariffs, we don't have to give any give back that Trump has been uh been demanding. Uh, so the there's no give back. There's Trump has no leverage over us by threatening to wreck our uh the US market uh for us. Uh so that will somehow give them an out. I do they have the backbone uh to to do this and same thing with Japan. Does Japan have the back go bone to do this? Well just before you had the meeting uh in Korea you had the AEN uh countries of Asia making a free trade agreement among themselves and that will include include trade with China. So it looks like before the meetings began, the Asian countries were already looking at how can we replace the US market that we were dependent on so that uh the United States cannot weaponize its foreign trade uh and hurt us like they did in 1998 with the Asia crisis when they smashed our economies financially through the International Monetary Fund and uh forced us to privatize to sell commanding heights of our industry to American investors where only Malaysia was able to avoid all of this uh this crisis. Uh will they remember that experience and is this what has been guiding them? We have no way of knowing. Nobody's mentioned it uh at all. But obviously when they've they've made an agreement, they're thinking uh that way. But I want to go back to China. Let's look at uh what what China's real interest uh is in all of this. There are a number of things that it wanted. For instance, if China was to say here here is what we want, one of the things that it wants is to reduce all of the constraints uh on China. For instance, uh one of the main things it's developed is its own airplane industry uh to compete with that of Boeing, Airbus and the Brazilian aircraft industry. Well, the International Transport Authority that's controlled by the United States has refused to authorize Chinese airplanes. Uh be it just won't sign off on on the airplanes. And that means that the Chinese airplanes are not to allowed to uh arrive in other world airports. This is obviously a block. Nobody mentioned that at the meeting, but uh certainly it's been a big discussion in China. uh China I I thought that perhaps China would agree to buy more Boeings uh in exchange for the US blocking this but uh apparently uh the problem is that as long as the western air companies export air control the market for airplanes they control the repairs and the replacement parts and they can essentially paralyze other count's air transport by uh simply uh not repairing and not providing replacement parts. They could do that. Uh the the Chinese did uh focus on the fact that the US has imposed the sanctions on the purchase of uh Dutch engraving machinery and the the whole fight over uh over uh computer chips. it it seems to have uh developed uh I think the small print when it all comes out of the agreement will mean that well you haven't complied with the United States essentially what what uh I think uh when she said the the the ship of international diplomacy requires two captains uh in order to work what he meant is that tit for tat that what the United States has designed Ed as a rules-based order are exactly the uh weaponization of trade and investment and the constraints and the ability to impose sanctions and the ability to with withhold exports that the United States has done. So I think China said uh we've agreed with you and Mr. Trump, we're going to apply the same logic to you that you've been doing to us. And if you want a fa you want us to relax the constraints on our exports to you, you have to relax all of the American constraints uh and the constraints of your satellites in Europe on on your exports to us. So we can buy the most sophisticated nvidia chips. uh we can buy the chipmaking machinery from Holland. Uh you will uh not be able to simply grab our investments uh in Europe or the United States like uh you've grabbed the Russia's uh 300 billion of dollars of deposits in Belgium. Uh it has to be a quidd proquo the same rules for us that uh you've been that apply to you. And if you have that symmetry, then we can go along it. And it looks to me from the preliminary reports that came out of these meetings that everything was a quid proquo and a a roll back. And that means that the entire last decade of edifice of specific limits to try to  China's uh uh industry uh computer industry aerrow uh airplane industry and other industries will have to be removed. I don't see Congress doing that. Uh Mr. Trump may say he'd love to do it uh and try to blame Congress. I'm sure he'll blame the Democrats and the left-wing communists like he likes to do. Uh but I I just don't see anything concrete coming out of these meetings except for uh China buying uh soybeans as it always does uh and a few other uh US products that uh it can use and uh productively and that it benefits China. I don't think China is going to do anything that benefits China unlike Korea and Japan which as you say don't do anything that doesn't benefit the United States. >> Yeah. >> I want to let me add also >> I I don't mean to be hard-nosed about this but I think it's a reasonable reading of the history that th this is always what happened. Each side gives up what matters least and then proceeds to maneuver in every way it can to evade, to avoid, to water down. And then when even those things don't work, then there's the whole illegal covert activity. I want I want to remind people a big item standing in the way of of fighting that war in Ukraine was the dependence of Europe on Russian oil and gas which the Europeans did not want to give up. So someone blew up the p pipeline. All right. That was another solution to you didn't need an agreement by uh Angela Merkel or anybody else to make a decision politically. You forced the issue in that way. That that's what I think is happening. Uh and I think I don't think we should be surprised. I think they have decided that the strategy with Mr. Trump. It took him six or seven months to kind of see how up and down, how uncertain, how herkyjerky it all is. When I brought up the stuff about the United Nations, I just wanted you to use I'm sorry about the Supreme Court, I just wanted to use it as an example of the many things that can happen that change the terrain on which all of this is fought. But you know, even if the Supreme Court says it has to be Congress, in a in a moment of the emergency, Mr. Trump will get the Congress to vote for whatever it is. In other words, he'll he'll immediately reinstate all of the tariffs that he has going as acts of Congress because he can control at least for another year what the votes of the Congress. There'll be close votes, but he'll he he has a good chance of winning them. So, he'll try that. Then the question will be in the interim while that works out do they apply do they not apply and then there'll be a dispute and there'll be another meeting in some global capital to work that it never stops this stuff never stops and while I am impressed Michael is is quite right to be impressed at what the Europeans are willing to do to destroy themselves and I'm assuming it's because they think that any other choice they make is even worse. But that that you know if you're any good as a political leader, you know that the name of the game is not to make the right choice in that moment of extreme, but never to let it get to that point. That's your job as a politic. don't get to the point where you have to choose between something that's horrible and something that's even more horrible. If that's the choice you have, you have already failed. And yes, you will congratulate yourself for making the choice that isn't the worst one. But but anyone with half a brain knows that your mistake was letting it get to that point, which the Europeans, that's what they did. That's why they're so desperate in their dead end that they have wor allowed themselves to be maneuvered into that they have to have a cataclysmic external scapegoat enemy and that's the role of Russia. Mr. Putin has become Stalin all over again, only hyped up even further because you have to hype your dangerous enemy because you're in you've done such a terrible job of coping with your existential problems. That's what happens. It's really partly what happened in the United States as well. We overdid the neoliberal period. We wiped out large sections of the American working class's well-being. And then we're surprised that in reaction that well that working class brings Donald Trump into power. You know, you've let this happen. The the ruling class in this country let this happen. It's on their watch. They're the ones who were gung-ho. They're the ones who must be at least the few of them who are smart must be wondering over the last few years when Xi Jinping leads the world in advocating multilateralism, multinationalism, free trade, an open economy in the world and the United States is closing itself quickly into economic nationalism. And yes, the end result of that dichotomy is one or the other will give. And if Michael is right, and I think he is, then Mr. Xi Jinping has announced, okay, if that's the way you want to play this game, we will play the nationalist game. And we're in a better position to do that than you are, which is correct. The Azion agreement, look at that. That is an momentous evasion of what the United States is trying to do. Close the free trade. No, they're opening a free trade. They're doing it regionally. They're doing it step by step. They're doing but they they are creating markets for themselves, all of them, so they don't have to rely on the United States. That seems to me straightforward and obvious that they should be doing that and that China should take the lead and that the South Koreans and the Japanese wink wink are looking to make China more of their customer because the United States is too unreliable. Michael, Michael, do you think that Japan is on the path of becoming the Germany of Asia? >> Here is what Michael, before going to your comment, here is what Pete Hexit said before the meeting between she and and and Donald Trump. >> Minister and I discussed today. The security situation around Japan and in the region remains, as he said and we agree, severe. The threats we face are real and they are urgent. China's unprecedented military buildup and its aggressive military actions speak for themselves. That's why President Trump's peace through strength agenda is so important. >> The plan, Michael, today for Germany is militarizing Germany. you know, somehow breaking down the, you know, the the the economy of Germany has suffered a lot during the conflict in Ukraine and they're talking about militarizing Germany. It seems that they want to put the money, the budget in the military-industrial complex. Is that going to happen to Japan in your opinion? Well, remember it's already happened to Japan once before it happened to Germany in the 1985 Plaza Accords and Louver Accords where it agreed to ra to US demands that it increase its exchange rate to make its cars unsailable to the US and to agree to US quantitative limits on the number of cars that it could sell in the United States. uh Japan uh since 1990 went into what was called the lost decade that I guess you could call the last the lost generation uh its uh economy uh shrank uh and its population has been shrinking its uh reproduction rates has uh fallen fallen fallen uh in there. So it's already gone down that route once and it decides that it likes that route. It can live with that route. it's it that they're very patient people. Uh so they've already surrendered uh to all of this and the fact that they're uh they've agreed to buy more US arms uh that don't work. They agreed to p to increase their purchase of 75% Americanmade rice that uh in the past uh Japan has said they don't like the American rice. It has pesticides. It it doesn't taste as much. It costs much less in the stores than Japanese-made rice. Well, they're agreeing to the the ruler said, "We don't care what kind of rice the Japanese like to eat. We're going to stuff American rice down their throats because that makes America great again." Uh they've also agreed to increase the arms, even though the arms from the US are just as bad as US rice, from two trillion to 2.5 trillion yen. That's a 25% increase in their purchase of US arms. Uh there uh they there was some worry uh in the US that Japan might ask the US to pay higher rents for its military bases there. And instead uh Trump has told Japan, you're going to have to pay us uh to share the burden of fighting Russia. uh you're going to have to uh pay uh more for our occupation costs so that we can continue to make sure that you don't do anything that benefits Japan more than the United States. It's a win-lose deal. That's what I've promised my foreign policy will be in. Japan's going along with this. There was all of this talk before uh the the last two weeks before the meeting when Japan's new uh prime minister has uh who's always been very very pro pro-American said that uh somehow well there may be a a plan B. She's going to increase trade with China. Uh she's going to open it up. And I think all of this was a threat by Japan saying you know we do have an alternative. There is a plan B. we can always uh trade with China. And I think that all that talk was just to try to minimize the demands that the United States will make. But the United States uh ter tariffs are still being imposed pretty heavily on uh Japan's car exports. But the important thing is that the whole automobile industry is changing to electronic vehicles. And that's where China has such a vast price increant in lowcost batterydriven electronic cars that it threatens not only the US and German and European car industry but the Japanese and Korean car industries. That's uh what somehow nobody was talking about uh in all of this. But this is the real thing that uh if Japan cannot uh export its cars to the US and Trump is imposing I think a 15% uh charge on them u which still uh gives Japan enough of a competition for gasoline powered automobiles. Uh but it doesn't the question is what's going to happen to the uh electronic vehicles especially now that Trump has fought with uh Alon Musk uh about over the electronic cars and uh if he really doesn't gets in a fight with Musk he can say okay I'm going to let in the Chinese uh uh automobiles and you know so much for you u Japan also agreed to continue to buy rely on US oil not to try to end uh to continue its talks with Russia to end World War II and the de you know who's going to control what islands by agreeing to buy more US oil uh nor Russian oil. uh it's agreed not to do that and we should realize that one of the things that was not discussed uh after the meetings between the US and China is what about all of the US uh rules against Russia uh exporting the the oil that the US sanctions were going to punish uh countries and banks and industries and shipping companies that bought US oil. Well, apparently uh the United States is not going to enforce these rules against China. Uh it will it is going to enforce them against India uh but uh not against China. So the it's what was not said in about the meetings what was not talked about uh discussions were the most important results of Trump's recent uh uh sanctions. And it looks like to me as if uh China said, "We're not going to go with any of your sanctions. If you really try to sanction uh to prevent us from buying oil uh wherever we want for free trade, then uh we're going to uh avoid our free trade agreements with the United States." And uh I think you'll be the loser on that. Uh there's one other thing I want to say about what Richard said about the ruling class in the United States which uh he reasonably says they're not acting in their interest. Well, whose interest are they acting in? And uh I think if you look at uh uh whose interests are not being so damaged, it's not the industrialists that seem to be running the policy. It's the uh financial sector, the rontier sector, finance and real estate, the fire sector and the uh Silicon Valley monopolies uh and the oil industry uh their industries, their interests have all been supported and the military-industrial complex. So it looks like the ruling class of the United States is not industry. It's the military-industrial complex which is not exactly a capitalist industry. It's a it's a cost plus uh the Keynesian or corrupt giveaway. Uh the oil industry uh natural resource rent and finance and uh real estate uh it's a a rontier society. It's it's a finance capital ruling class, not really the industrialist ruling class. And I think that's how you can explain the uh the the how the US sanctions have backfired uh so much from the point of view of American industrial uh development and it's it's labor force. And why isn't the United States supporting industry in in favor of the finance capital industries? Because industry does something that the other industries don't. They employ labor. And if you employ labor, its wages are going to go up. And there is still a class war against labor here uh that's uh shared by the Democrats and the Republicans alike. I think that uh the if you look at the agreements and who benefits and who suffers from them, you if you look at it from the point of view of this domestic class war here, as I'm sure you you have a lot to say about, uh it it's more explanatory about just who has the power o through by being the donor class over Trump. Richard, let me ask a question by our audience here. And he asked it. Here is the question. Should China trust the safety of the soybeans it receives from the United States? What's your understanding of China and be behavior of China so far? Because as we know the Chinese president she was talking the way that we want to cooperate with the United States. But is the these two countries is the United States willing to build trust in terms of the trades? >> Well, my assumption is they will test those soybeans very carefully. Uh most countries do a certain amount of that kind of testing when they import for all kinds of reasons. Uh so my assumption is they will if they complain and say that there's something inadequate about them. Well then you know something not necessarily that there's anything inadequate about them but that they have a reason they don't want to buy them. I mean I'm not I'm not going to quarrel with the Japanese. They have every right to prefer whatever rice they want. But the statement that it doesn't taste as good as it, you know, okay, that's a government that wants to push back. And I understand that why the Japanese would want to push back. You know, for years there's been a fight between the United States and Europe. The Europeans claim they do not want to allow the United States to export chickens because in the United States, chickens are farmed in an industrial manner, which if you have any shred of sympathy for the animal kingdom would horrify you. If you've never visited one of these chicken factories, it is beyond beyond a horror story that you could ever develop. Well, but they couldn't do that until they developed the following argument. It turns out that one of the normal chemical procedures done on a dead chicken is to douse it in chlorine. So it is in Europe it is referred to as chlorinated chicken and they have all kinds of health concerns about in you know ingesting chlorine when you eat your chicken. You know I find this amusing. It may all be true. I don't know. But I know that the authorities in these countries don't do that unless there's a good reason. And whoever makes money by processing chickens in Europe that are bought from the United States just lost a fight with whoever profits by keeping those chickens out. and the government made the decision which way to go and then called in the artists who come up with the argument about the chlorine which may be true. I don't I have I'm no chemist. I have no idea. You could go on and on and on. These kinds of arguments are an old established part of international negotiations over trade because in every quote unquote free trade period of time, interests were always at work trying to carve out exemptions. For example, throughout the whole neoliberal period of the United States, starting in the 19, if you want to call it that, in the 1960s, when the United States was, you know, the top of the pile in the world economy, the United States carved out an exemption for a pickup trucks. I think we've talked about this before. Starting in the early60s, the United States negotiated a tariff, imposed it on everyone else, and the tariff applied to pickup trucks made outside the United States and brought in. In fact, I believe uh I believe that was connected even to the chicken business. But in any case, the important point is a tariff was put on the pickup truck, giving American automobile producers a profit bonanza because they could block competition from Volkvagen and all the other Europeans who were able to produce a better, cheaper pickup truck. But now they couldn't bring them in because with the tariff it was too expensive. And so suddenly Ford and General Motors in the period when already they were facing competition that they could see they were going to lose they had salvation. They had one kind of vehicle where they could what do they need to do? They needed to convince the young American male that his masculinity was wrapped up in having and driving a pickup truck whether he needed it or not. Had nothing to do with it. You were manly. It was the way Marlboro sold its cigarettes. That's what how the car companies you got off your horse with smoking your Marlboro and climbed into your pickup truck to finish your Marlboro. You were now a real man. The culture of everything. It had to do with a tariff imposed in the middle of an anti-tariff free trade regime. You're you're now seeing politicians agree with the United States. Michael may be right. They may be really caving in, but I I'm not so sure. I think that's their short-term strategy for sure. But they may be assuming I think they are that there will be ways to minimize, to postpone, to evade, and eventually to undo whatever it is they're agreeing to with this gentleman. And he too will pass. And that's what they're going to focus on. Well, that's certainly the logical thing for them to do, Richard. You're uh you're quite right. I guess the equivalent to the auto uh trade a half century ago uh is the computer uh trade today and uh just before the Trump uh meeting with with President Xi uh you had the Nvidia uh meeting where its uh head Mr. Hong said that uh he told the repor reporters in his press conference that uh Nvidia can continues to be shut out of the Chinese market because of the US constraints and that that's going to hurt America more than it hurts China. uh and he delivered his big speech and he said that without uh uh exporting to more to China uh Nvidia's even though Nvidia's just became I think the $4 trillion company uh yesterday and its shares were soaring on the New York Stock Exchange in Asia markets the Chinese uh com uh chip developers were chip makers were soaring even more they've jumped significantly uh with Nvidia leaving the country and so certainly the investors in China uh and investors in the Chinese stock market believe that uh the uh the United States is not going to release its constraints on uh Nvidia's uh advanced computer chip exports and so all of that happy talk about if you do this we'll do this and everybody will be happy those big ifs are not going to actually materialize so I can say that uh this is probably I can say more uh convincingly that uh this is going to happen for the computer chip market and America's agreement with China than I can say with uh uh Korea and Japan but of course each of these countries have uh minority parties And you may see and the way to make your forecast come true, Richard, is for um Korea and Japan uh voters to react react just as European voters have done. They want to throw the rascals out of the current government. They say uh the Korean voters say we want to put Korea first, not America first. The Korean War is over. And the Japanese voters will say World War II is over. We it won't be over until we sign an agreement with Japan to officially end World War II, which is still officially on. Uh we want to end the war and uh by ending the war, end the US occupation and uh reorient our trade to what's best for Japan, not for the US. So this domestic political challenge uh in uh in Korea and Japan may reflect the same kind of nationalistic voter reaction that we're seeing in uh in America satellites in Europe from Germany to France uh to to England. That's the interesting uh that's that that's the political dynamic at work. You're muted. >> Richard, Europeans, looking at what has happened between the two presidents, how do they feel in your opinion? How? >> Well, I think the Europeans continue to strike me as being uh the proverbial uh deer in the woods caught in the headline headlights of an oncoming car and frozen in a in a position that is extremely vulnerable and dangerous but transfixed in some way that they cannot uh get out of it. I was struck by the results of the Dutch election. I I'm no expert on Holland, but the right-wing anti- uh immigrant specialist was defeated uh in Holland over the last few days and a kind of center centerleft opponent was coming in. Uh there will be a co there has to be a coalition government. The Dutch have this notion of freedom of political choice. They had 15 parties uh contesting um most of whom got one or more seats in the parliament. Uh they run their democracy differently. They actually believe that there ought to be differences that negotiate with one another and not just for the votes but once you get you know it's proportional representation. So if you get a certain number of votes then you get that number of seats in the parliament and so the negotiation is continuous and you have to work out your differences. Fortunately here in the United States we don't allow anything like that. It's winner or take all. So there's no negotiation once the election is over. Uh and we call that democracy only because we don't know what the word means. Uh, in any case, the Europeans are in terrible, terrible, terrible shape. There's no other way to describe it. The statistics, if you look at it from a macro perspective, are very bad. England is very bad and Germany is very bad. France is not good. Italy is strange. Uh, Spain is too small. And then the rest of them are tiny. It's just nothing is being resolved. Everything is being given away to the United States. Their their overly expensive energy is being locked in for the next five or 10 years if I understand what they're doing. They continue to denounce Russia which takes gives them nothing that I can see. And they continue to fight the war in Ukraine which they are losing. So I mean when you add it all up it is an awful awful situation. They are sniping away at their social safety net that is pissing off the people of those countries. Some of them are going to the right. Some of them are going to the left. But either way the middle that was so comfortable in Europe for so long is now resorting to to pretend politics. not not a real politics. They notice the growth of the left. They notice the growth of the right. Um and they and they don't see any salvation and there is no there is no salvation unless they break with one or another of the chains holding them down at this point. And the right wing really doesn't offer much. And if if I were the right wing, I would have to come up with something new because beating the drum of immigrants doesn't work. If after a while it looks as ugly as it usually is and it doesn't solve your problem. That's going to be a problem in the United States. Also, exporting the poorest people in your country, the undocumented immigrant is not going to solve the economic problems of the United States. Just isn't. There not enough of them. They don't hold the position. And the secondary troubling effects of even doing that are out going to outweigh any benefit you could get from it. So yes, it may be a clever political ploy. For a while, the people might believe that by treating immigrants the way ICE treats them is a necessary, but it will not solve the problem. And after a while, that problem being unsolved is going to drive people in new and different directions. Next Tuesday, the people of New York City look about to show everybody what that new direction is. Well, I think Richard, I hope uh I I think we're both in agreement that we hope that Japan and Korea will not be as subservient as Europe has shown itself to be. uh and if its parties call itself or if any party calls itself center left it means it's not the left right >> center means we are not the left and that means we're on the right that's my view and that that's the political problem >> well the guy who the the one who came in first calls himself in Holland in Netherlands a sender left but in order to govern he has said he's going to make a coalition with the actual left. So there that's the question what what that might mean. >> Thank you so much Richard Michael. Great pleasure as always. >> Okay. Thank you. >> See you next week. Bye-bye.