Hi everybody. Today is Thursday, June 19, 2025 and our friend Richard Wolf and Michael Hudson are back with us. Welcome back. Good. Glad to be here. Let's start Richard with you and what's going on in the Middle East between Iran and Israel. United States has decided to talk with Iran on Sunday and before on Friday, Israel attacked Iran. What's going on in your opinion? Well, you know, no one will be surprised who watches this program uh about my answer. Uh but you know, if you have a point of view and if things begin to develop that are consistent with that point of view, well then you're going to hear that point of view repeated. Here's what I think is going on. We are living through the final stages of the century of anti-colonialism. It's it's over this European effort that is several centuries old to expand from the European core and to take over the rest of the world either on the grounds that it was empty and and and therefore needed to be populated which was mostly not true or that it was peopleled by inferiors who needed the blessing. think of the Christian religion by and large um and modern civilization and advanced economics and so was lucky to be colonized because it sped up all of those important activities. Okay, that worked for several centuries. It allowed capitalism to grow to grow its market above all else to source its inputs all over the world so that the profitability of capitalism could be maintained. If you remember, Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx each in their different ways talked about a tendency for the rate of profit to fall by which they meant the mechanism whereby capitalism would shut down its own economic development. This could be postponed as Markx showed in volume three of capital if you were able to get cheaper and cheaper sources of raw materials and so forth which the colonized world was good for and the same applied to labor once you made that mobile etc etc. The last h 100red years. So from the early 20th now to the early 21st century has been the century of anti- colon the end the push back the exhaustion of colonialism as the mass of the people Asia Africa Latin America each in their own way at their own pace shaped by their own cultures and religions and and physical natural conditions fought for independence, fought to be out from under the colonial yoke. And the last and final stages of that we are living through. And why why do I call it the last and final stages? because I think there's something very basic linking US policy in Ukraine, in China, and in the Middle East. And in each of those cases, it's an attempt to hold back the last stage of anti-colonialism, which is why I think it is a doomed effort. It will not work whether it works in the immediate moment or not. This is going against history. And as history has shown us, you go against history, you lose. And we have been losing one co exony after another. And why do I say they're all the same? Well, I'm going to focus just because I don't want to keep talking on China and the Middle East. Starting around two 2010, the United States figured out, having deluded itself before that by pretending that China wasn't developing. By 2010, it was so obvious around the world that even the United States figured out that China had not only never been a colony, not only set itself the goal of undoing what is called in China the hundred years of humiliation, but that they had figured out this mixture of private and state enterprise which could achieve economic omic growth rates that nothing in the west could come near, including the United States. From that time, it's about 20 years now. From that time, the United States has shifted over into trying to slow to stop to reverse the economic development of China. And none of that has worked either. Oh, here and there they may have achieved some slowing, but the larger picture as everybody can see is China grows, American efforts to prevent it fail. Okay. Now, let's turn to Israel and Iran. You'll see the same thing. Israel is an anomaly. It is a settler colonialism after that's no longer possible. The only settler colonialisms that ever worked, which are a model for Israel, were the settler colonialism that literally genocidally killed all the local people, whether they be the Mayori or the Aboriginals in Australia or the Native Americans here in the Western Hemisphere. But that's over. You can't do that anymore. You cannot extinguish the local population because the local population has friends, has associates, has supporters. The Palestinians are not in the position that the Mayoris were or the Aboriginals in or the American so-called Indians, etc., etc. So, it's a hopeless quest. But the United States needs them. It needs them as their proxy in the Middle East because the Middle East has a lot of oil. Okay. So now the Iranians enter. The Iranians are part of the whole rebellion against colonialism. The modern Iran is the rebellion against what the United States did to the Shaw, excuse me, to Mosedc back in the 1950s. And yeah, they had a temporary victory. They put in the reactionary Shaw who was a pawn of the West, but eventually because it's history, the Shaw was overthrown and ends up a sick old man protected by Henry Kissinger because the project of controlling Iran is over. Yes, it was captured by the religious rebellion that happened often because the west was so busy killing off the revolutionary socialist communist opposition that it left either the proxies of imperial or the religious community. You saw that in Iran. They got rid of the most one of the largest and most powerful uh communist parties anywhere in the so-called third world, the TUDA party in in Iran, which if you go back and study could have and would have been the revolutionary leadership of that country. You got rid of the equivalent in Afghanistan so that it was the Taliban. You know the religious the very people armed by the west to destroy the revolutionary anti-imperialism gets replaced by the religious anti-imperialism. It's the irony of it all. So here you have the one remaining settler colonialism that has not or has not yet exterminated the local people in the way the older ones did. and he can't really do it now. There's too much opposition. Look what they are doing. And put aside for a moment the horror of it. But the extremity that Israel has to do what it is doing to survive, it's hopeless. You know, they face extinction or they face extinction and they can have any future they want as long as it's extinction. It's like your parents taking you for ice cream and you can have any flavor you want as long as it's vanilla. You know, it it is a disaster. And what will happen now with Iran? Iran has friends. Iran has mutual defense arrangements with Russia and Russia with China. And what are you doing here? Even inside the Trump administration, there are people saying, "Don't be crazy here. What you are doing, you are isolating yourself." Well, that's not news. That's already been happening. Every vote on Israel and Palestine in the last several years has been the whole world against the United States and Israel. It's over. History is moving in a direction that makes all of this a hopeless effort. Let me conclude this way. Whatever happens now, Iran is being told by what's happening, you better get nuclear weapons or else this kind of game will be played on you whenever the West wants to. You're not getting rid of nuclear. You're making it even more certain that Iran and many other countries watching all of this people don't get the the the news here in this country. But let me conclude with an illustration. Over the last few days, the government in Pakistan issued a statement. If if any nuclear weapons are used against Iran, they the Pakistanis will use them against Israel. Iran is a very large country. You could use nuclear weapons there and it can survive. Israel is a very small country. small in geography, small in population. It cannot survive a nuclear attack. We are actually at the point where this is what is being done and the extremity of it, which I know scares everybody. I'm not saying you shouldn't be, but put it in its historical context. These are the desperate final efforts of the West to try to cope with the end of the whole colonial operation. They can't do it. They can't maintain the strength of the dollar. They can't maintain the power of Western financial arrangements. They can't do it. And you're watching the frustration and the rage that works that out. And it and and it may overwhelm Watch. Mr. Trump may have his chosen intelligence chief, Tulsi Gabbard, explain to him that the consensus of the intelligence community is that Iran is several years away from being able to have a nuclear weapon, which by the way has been the finding about Iran for the entirety of this century. If you go back to 2004 when Coen Powell was the Secretary of State, he said so too. All right. We are bringing up this dead horse about nuclear weapons being fashioned in the depths of a mountain. We've been doing this for 25 years. That's what I mean. It's a desperate effort to try somehow by argument, by intervention, by overt activity, covert activity to stop the movement of history. And that's a hopeless task that makes these people crazy. Michael, go ahead. Well, I think Richard has framed the issue correctly. It's uh we're seeing the final US western struggle against uh what uh the west sees as an attempt by the global majority to escape from western control especially uh US control. Uh and he talked about colonialism. World War I and the aftermath set a new stage of European colonialism with the break up of the Ottoman Empire and that saw Britain and France redraw the map of the Middle East. Uh we all know how it cut across ethnic lines and caused the last century of instability from Iraq uh to Syria uh and the rest of the near east. And the uh the key to all of this was already emerging as control of oil. And uh with this control of oil and with the uh the redrawing of uh the old uh uh colonialism, you had the emergence of financial colonialism led by the United States. And you could say it it's really uh financial imperialism uh because uh the American financial policy started with um imposing the interali debts uh on Europe uh plunging uh Europe uh into financial chaos that led to World War II as a result of the allies turning to Germany uh to pay reparations debts way beyond its ability to pay so that the allies could pay the United States. This whole system broke down in 1929 and by 1931 there was a moratorum. Uh but while the uh the US European uh relationships were breaking down uh oil was being uh put in place uh and after World War II uh you saw uh what uh seemed to be an uh what Richard was talking about the withdrawal from American sponsored uh colonialism uh and to the United states uh it tried to prevent this from the very beginning with a military umbrella. Now uh uh this military umbrella is has led to uh well it led to the overthrow uh of uh the Iranian uh elected uh middle class democracy in 1953 by MI6 in Britain in conjunction with Kermit Roosevelt in the United States. uh and the u imposition of the sha uh and his Savaka dictatorship uh led uh the United States to make plans uh to uh to solid it solidified its plans to control the entire Near East because if you could control near east the the Neareastern regimes, you could control oil and oil was the key to uh American uh control, financial control of the world because oil was the most profitable uh rent extracting uh sector uh in the world. Uh I did a study for the Chase Manhattan Bank in 1965 showing that the uh average US oil company investment in Middle Eastern and other uh foreign oil the entire investment was recouped in balance of payments terms in only 11 months. So uh the United States uh realized that this was the the the uh Middle East was the key to American uh policy. Now uh right uh there's been a lot of discussion especially on on your site quite that uh certainly has a great point that opponents of of this looming war with Iran uh say that it's not an American interest. What interest do we have in uh fighting uh with Iran? uh is this only is Israel's interest? Why is it our interest to to fight in Iran? Uh look at what happened in Iraq. Was uh Iraq was not posing a threat to America. Iran was not throwing uh posing a threat to America. But to the uh American uh uh empire strategists uh the postc colonialists they they are posing a threat simply by existing independently uh uh on and seeking to uh act in their own economic self-interest. Now there already 50 years ago this logic of American imperialism in the near east was guiding uh US foreign policy. uh around 1974 1975 uh probably late 74 I sat in on a military uh strategy discussion uh of uh I was invited by my boss Herman Khan at the Hudson Institute uh to sit in on this to uh and the strategy was how to break up uh Iran into its uh ethnic parts uh in the event that there was another attempt by uh Iran to uh ever seek its own self-interest. Well, the whole reason we'd imposed the sha was so it wouldn't do that. But uh in case the sha uh sought to do that uh and uh Herman Khan found the weakest spot in the uh Iranian uh multithnic nation to bestan on Iran's northeast border uh with Pakistan. uh and of the Iran also contains the Kurds, Tajixs and Turk Azerbaijanis uh and others whose ethnicities are uh to be played off against each other. uh uh you can be sure that in the last few years or decades, the United States has uh been working with these ethnicities to to try to do in Iran uh what the Kurds uh have been uh doing were doing to destabilize uh Syria by pressing for their own interest. This is uh the US strategy u that has been applied to Russia and China. Let's uh if you can break up these great countries into parts and uh have client oligarchies in uh these ethnic parts that are split up, then they will be unable to lead the fight against the uh US uh NATO centered world order. Well, this fight is not uh simply uh against colonialism. Russia was not a a colony and China really was not a colony. Uh it but Russia, China uh and Iran might lead the uh anti-colonialist and essentially uh the ddollarization plans that are uh are at work. Well, three decades after uh this uh 1974 meeting of uh how to uh make a long-term plan for American control of nearing oil. Uh General Wesley Clark pointed out that uh Iran was to be the capstone in seven countries that the United States needed to take over and control in order to dominate the Near East. starting with Iraq and Syria, Lebanon, Libya certainly in North Africa, uh Somalia and Sudan. All this was to culminate in the takeover of Iran. So we're what we're seeing today is not simply uh Mr. Netanyahu uh telling Trump uh please protect us by attacking Iran. This is uh I think you had Lawrence Wilkersonson a few days ago, Nema, on your show saying that uh uh uh Netanyahu and Israel were simply acting in keeping with a long uh US plan for how to uh how to break up uh Iran. And uh uh here's how the the neocons spell out the US national interest in overthrowing the uh Iranian government uh for a regime change. Uh the assumption is that if uh if if Israel uh can indeed blow up uh uh Kumeni uh that his religious leadership will fall apart and there will be a secular reaction uh that will some uh uh somehow not really press for Iranian national interest but will just uh be demoralized and will let the United States uh impose a kind of client uh uh uh client dictatorship sort of like uh we have over uh Jordan. Well, uh, the the the national interest in the Near East, first of all, we already know it's it's centered in, uh, Saudi Arabia and the Arab Emirates and Kuwait with oil. And the aim is not only uh to get to control near eastern oil but the money the vast investment funds that uh Saudi Arabia and the other Arab states have accumulated in invest in running their oil their trade surpluses have been invested mainly in the United States in treasury bonds and in uh stocks and bonds. uh and this in investment is sort of holding them hostage. uh Saudi Arabia and the other Arab strait states are really afraid to come to Iran's support even though they realize that the attack on Iran is to consolidate American control over the near east because if they acted uh against US interest all of their foreign investment their national funds and their private investments are held hostage uh by the uh in New York and London uh Just as uh the United States uh confiscated 300 billion of uh Russia's uh savings in the west, they could do the same with um with Neareastern holdings. But it goes much more than that. uh the uh much more of the uh control the uh to the United States uh the Iran is not only the key to controlling uh the near east and its soil but also for China's builtin road program through a new silk road of railway transport to the west. Uh Nema you made I sent you that's the map. uh if the United States can block this uh this uh road then uh h China's uh attempt to create a new silk road uh by railway will not be able to link up uh with uh Europe and the silk road will not be able to go all the way to the Atlantic as the Mediterranean and the Atlantic as uh uh China and uh hope to do. Uh you can see there it goes from western China through central Asia through uh through uh to uh uh to to Iran. Well, the same thing uh you could uh the same logic appears uh with Russia. Uh and uh Iran is the key to blocking Russian development via the Caspian and S access to the south. uh under US control, an Iranian client regime could threaten Russia from its southern flank uh and prevent Russia from bypassing the Suez Canal and having direct uh export uh access uh to the south as uh the and to all the way to uh to India uh as this map shows. So uh these these are the uh Iran is the key not only to US control of oil but to its fight against Russia and China together and that's what makes Iran a central pivot on which uh uh US national interest in preventing the rest of the world from creating an alternative to the financial uh colonialism financial imperialism, financial and investment control uh of uh uh foreign countries uh rests. Yeah. Richard, when it comes to the conflict that you've mentioned between Iran and Israel, do do you believe that the people who Nadia and his administration, do they really believe that they're playing some sort of role as we've learned before that they're just a pawn something like Ukraine? They're they've been used by the United States and it doesn't seem that would be the case in the mind of Nadia and his administration. Well, I I have no special knowledge of of the inside of what's going on in Israel, but uh for me, it seems clear from what I can tell that Israel understands, and I think they're right about this, that without the support of the United States, their situation is it's over. They cannot they cannot prevail against Palestine. They cannot prevail against anybody without the United States. Um and therefore they can't make independent judgments. So when I hear the United States is going to go into Iran because of Israel, I don't believe that. I mean, I I don't think the Israelis have that power. I don't think they ever did. Um, I I understand they have supporters here in the United States who play important roles. Apac and other organizations like that. I've read that literature. I understand that. But that's not enough. and they're not big enough even domestically here to be able to do quite to quite quite do that at least I don't think so. So for me it's more the United States pulling the strings and Israel performing what it is the United States wants them to do. You know, if you go back historically, Israel played a very, I'm going to be polite now, ambiguous role in South Africa during all the long years of struggle to get them for out from under apartheid. Israel played another ambiguous role with the Contras in El Salvador. uh if you remember learning about it, Israel was asked to do all kinds of things to support US strategies and tactics. Um and I think that's what the deal is. We will support you so that you survive, but you have to do what we tell you or else you're on a short leash. So, I think Michael's arguments about why or how Iran may play a role is much more the driver of what's going on. Israel is a a junior partner and you know it has been noted all through the Middle East for for decades that United States benefits because a great deal of the Arab world focuses on Israel and the horror of Israel and the uh humiliation by and from Israel. Uh, and this is very useful because it keeps the heat lower on the United States than it might otherwise be. We have a facade. Uh, it's Israel that is the oppressor. And of course now in Gaza this has gone to to lengths that the Israeli state now approaches a situation where its behavior is too grotesque to be salvaged by anything. I mean, you are digging a long-term grave of your own in Gaza, independent of what you do to the Palestinian people who who happen to be in your way. I would say though, not not in disagreement with Michael, but I don't I think we can put our two perspectives together. The attempt to slow down China, if you read Michael's argument just a little bit differently, the effort to slow down China requires messing up the planned role of Iran in the Belt and Road initiative, which in turn is key to China's having the economic um relationships that will save it from whatever damage the United states can do, for example, tariffs and so on. They rroot their trade to the rest of of the bricks. They don't have to uh they don't need the United States in the way they once did. Uh and that's that's something they've been working on anyway and they continue. And as to United States's emphasis on Iran, the belt and road, the route of the of the train can be changed. If you can't go through Iran, there are other ways to proceed. They will be expensive. That will be a cost. United States can slow them a little bit. But in the end, they would have to do a lot more. And they will try. They will try. They've been trying for a long time. They'll continue to try. They have no other policy. They are not yet persuaded that they have to sit down with the Chinese and work out a deal that they they don't get that part. Uh and they don't think they have to do that yet. On the other hand, when they lose, even if they lose a little at a time, slowly the balance shifts. They lost the war in Vietnam or else Vietnam might have been a very different situation. They lost the war in Iraq. They are losing the war in Ukraine. You know, they lost the war in Afghanistan. They had all kinds of plans for those countries. Those are gone or they're sitting on a shelf waiting for to be resurrected at some future point in their fantasy when the world makes it possible. But their options are shrinking. Their freedom of action is is shrinking. And that's part of why they put as much emphasis on Iran because it may be one of their last chances to try to stop the march of history. But my money is on the history. I don't think they can do it any more than Britain. And I I don't want to harp on it, but I think it's relevant. Britain fought the two wars to prevent the runaway colony, the United States, from achieving independence and then from developing itself. The British tried. They tried in 1776. They tried again in 1812. And they were ambivalent in the American Civil War about whether they should side with the North or the South. But once they lost the two wars and once they saw which way the Civil War was going, they understood they couldn't do that anymore. So they cut a deal. The first part of that deal was the Monroe Doctrine, which had very little to do with Mr. Monroe. It had to do with the fact that the British said, "Okay, okay, okay. You don't bother us in Asia and Africa and we won't bother you in South America. In other words, they made a deal. I don't admire it. I understand it's the quintessence of colonialism. It's like in 1884 when they sat down in Berlin and carved up Africa among the participating European countries. The same thing. But it is the recognition that repressing the United States wasn't going to work. And and to to the credit of the British and the Americans, they held to that plan. Even as their roles were reversed from the United States being a minor colony of Britain, today we have Britain a minor colony of the United States and the British have no option, no choice and are behaving in just the way we would imagine. hopeless economic decline, um, horrible politics, abuse of the working class on a scale that even other European countries do not allow, at least not yet. Extraordinary. It's really extraordinary. I think Oh, go on. Go ahead, Michael. Well, I think that uh Richard is quite right and the way that he's framed uh the issue that the United States indeed has lost the wars that he's mentioned uh but this fight with Iran uh and has become in its turn an issue for framing the whole the US plans for a vast new military buildup. Uh and you can you can see the it's a crazy plan. Uh the ease with which Iranian missiles have been able to penetrate Israel's uh Iron Dome defense has shown the whole folly of Trump's pressure for an enormous trillion dollar subsidy for the American military industrial complex to make a similar boondoggle here. Uh so so far uh only the oldest and least effective Iranian uh missiles have been used because their aim is to deplete Israel's anti-missile defenses uh so that in a few days a week at most it'll be able to uh block uh Israel will be unable to block any serious Iranian attack with its really big hypersonic missiles. Well, uh, this already was demonstrated a few months ago when Iran showed how easily it could bomb not only, uh, Israel u with an demonstration, but uh, it could bomb US military bases even when it gave them advanced knowledge. Here is where we're going to send, you know, the missiles. They're not going to explode. They're not going to blow up your soldiers, but uh we're just going to show you how easily uh we can uh get right through the uh the uh your defenses. Well, the the center point of Trump's Republican budget that is now in Congress for enormously increasing the US deficit, increasing uh the United States uh debt uh uh official government debt uh is you is uh based on uh the need to to essentially say, "Oh, it's all for Israel." And uh just as Richard said, they're using Israel as an excuse to try to deflect foreign uh anger away from the United States. Yeah. Focus on Israel. Uh we're uh is all Israel's doing, not our doing. Uh even though we're supplying Israel with bomb bombs and doing everything that Richard described. So I I I want to explain what the uh what the congressional dynamics in giving Trump uh the uh right to actually declare war on Iran is. This is the constitutional fight in Congress. Uh a president is not supposed to go to war without getting uh support of Congress. Trump has not got that yet. Congress has not passed a pro-war uh uh authorization for Trump to do this. So, we're in a constitutional crisis uh in the United States now uh that Trump is simply ignoring uh as he's ignored the Constitution in other ways saying, "Well, what are you going to do about it? Uh there's not much that they're doing." So, uh, the the US military budget is being vastly increased by this crazy American Iron Dome plan, uh, here. Uh, the Reagan administration had toyed with this uh, beam the bomb uh, attempt to say, "Oh, well, we can get lasers uh, huge lasers to blow up any kind of uh, Russian or other foreign missile attacked on us." Well, that was shown to be impos uh unworkable, but it it cost a lot of money and profits for the indust military-industrial complex. Well, uh the not only is the uh uh the military budget vastly increasing, forcing the US into deficit, but uh the uh the the military budget is only half of what the United States is actually paying on military uh because uh uh American foreign military aid to its allies Ukraine, Israel, South Korea Europe, Asian countries to buy US arms is all uh appears as foreign aid not as part of the US military budget. The the US is concealing the entire the enormous cost of this new cold war buildup uh to the American economy. And this cost of the war is what is uh doing here just what it's doing in Germany and Europe. It's forcing a cut back of social programs, cut back in uh med uh medical uh insurance, Medicaid uh is is part of the bill. But uh we're we're having a polarization of the spending towards the uh one the financial 1% at the top of the economic pyramid with tax cuts and with a payment to the military uh complex direct by not only by direct uh contracts uh but by all of this foreign aid that is immediate that never the dollars for foreign aid don't ever leave the United states, they're paid directly to the uh the the military to provide uh the arms that the uh recipients of this foreign military aid uh have received uh in order to so-cal uh defense uh defend themselves uh with all sorts of boondoggles connected to it. So that's that's uh really uh the the constitutional problem. And there's I want to just in passing mention one other constitutional uh issue. The uh the article uh 51 of the UN charter says that a member state may not attack another state and unless it's attacked by that country. The US is violating the UN charter as well as its own uh domestic uh US the 19 the 2001 authorization for the use of military force in America uh is not applicable to this because the United States hasn't been uh under attack. The US is uh attacking uh or planning to attack Iran. So the whole uh the whole body of law, the whole context uh that was supposedly put in place uh to have the United States uh create a postworld war II order of world peace and trade and investment is been torn apart uh by this. And it's torn apart again by the pretense that uh uh the war in Iran is in America's national interest because our interest is preventing any attempt to with by other countries to withdraw from the the dollar the US- centered financial system to any attempt to ddollarize their economies uh Trump has said will be met with enormous tariffs on these countries. This is this fight goes way beyond simply bombing Iran. It's the I think uh Richard's introductory comment said this is like the final struggle between uh western hedgeimonyy uh way beyond uh military colonialism between western hedgeimonyy and the global majority seeking to break free and follow its own uh national self-interest. Yeah. Richard. Yeah. Let me add a couple of things that that are different topics, but I'll show you how they how they link. Um, the United States, as most countries, as most people who follow know, is has got one of the worst crime problems in the world. Uh we have guns as everybody knows and we use them as everybody knows and more more people are shot uh either killed or injured by guns uh in criminal activities of one kind or another every year. Nonetheless, we have always required that police officers whose job it is to deal with that problem have a badge that must be visible so that anyone they arrest or anyone who observes them can get their name and their badge number. and they are not allowed to refuse a request for that information. We now have a militarized police force, the ICE, which is allowed to wear masks and to refuse to identify itself. Okay. What are you doing? If no one in their right mind could suggest that the immigrant population, documented or otherwise, represents a a threat to the American people, more urgent or more immediate than gun crime. We don't allow the police to deal with gun crime by officers who have masks and don't have to identify themselves. But we are doing that with immigrants. And we have endless displays of ICE agents surrounding a farmer in the field, a car wash worker in the corner car wash, a a person who does the dishes in the back of a restaurant or cleans the hotel room, uh the glorious jobs that our immigrants are supposed to be taking from us. No one could argue. So what are you doing? What are you doing with police who are not required to follow the rules of a civilized society the way the police are who are asked to deal with violent armed criminals? Wow. Wow. What? This ought to be front and center a big problem. Why isn't it? Well, I would argue that we now have a population that the people who run this country believe can be treated this way. And I think it is very naive to imagine that if you're be going to behave towards perfectly und non-dangerous pe I read today of a a a farmer in California who uh works in the vineyards you know the wine country being surrounded at his church while he's doing his religious activity. uh surrounded by ICE people yanked away. His his children, his wife do not know. The ICE does not tell them where he's going. Do not allow him access to his own family or to the lawyer they have procured. You know you to think that this kind of behavior unloaded on these people would not be applied next to others. Well, you can already see there were there's already all kinds of signs of the ideological rightwing wanting to make that application. before the huge demonstrations last Saturday, I watched a sheriff somewhere in Florida, I don't remember the name, uh explaining on television that if any of those protesters come here and they don't do what we tell them, we will shoot them. We will kill you, says the man in full uniform who is the police chief of this jurisdiction. Okay. Uh if you're a responsible leader, you know that among the people who take instructions from you lower in the are people whose understanding of boundaries is let's say underdeveloped and who will misunderstand what you're saying as a license to to to persecute people. You know, Mr. Netanyahu doesn't give the order but below him are the people who bomb hospitals. It's remarkable what we are being led and that you know it's possible that that isn't orchestrated but it is also possible that it is and that there is a notion here that one needs to prepare the American people for a long period of war as all of these battles are fought out just in case It turns out that you can't bunker bomb your way out of the morass of of of Iran. I do want to remind people because I think many don't know that Iran is a very large country in a way that Afghanistan and Vietnam and other aren't or weren't. This is a different kind of enemy. We haven't had that before. And we didn't do well in Vietnam and Afghanistan and Iraq. And I want to remind people, we didn't do well even though the United States is the most militarily armed country in the world and among the richest. And those enemies, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, were among the poorest countries on this planet and they won and we lost. That itself should make you worry that there's a a larger historical process going on here that you maybe ought to ask some questions about rather than to assume. And I I I am very worried that if this goes badly for Israel, for Iran, it will only serve to persuade that part of the country that supports this activity to support more of it. It's that old problem. If the plan doesn't succeed, you have to do more of it. If it doesn't succeed again, you have to do still more. Whereas the rest of us are saying, see, this is not a good plan. No, no, no, no, no. And those lines have been drawn in this country now pretty well. And the support for Mr. Trump. Even though I I also will note that there are now quite a few people in Mr. Trump's MAGA organizations who do not want this war in Iran. Tucker Carlson speaks out against it. Um the the strange woman from Georgia Green speaks out against it. Steve Bannon speaks out against it. Okay. Uh these things um are very serious dissenters and they have a fairly strong following. Now Mr. Trump has to deal with the the damage to his own movement of moving in this direction, but of course he has to worry about the damage if he doesn't. And that's what happens to you when you're on the wrong side of a historical process. You can't find anything that solves your problem. you're reduced to picking the the one with the least damage to your situation, but damage you're going to have. And well, Richard's point is that we're living in a lawless country, lawless domestically uh as well as uh internationally. Uh and it's al his other point is that it's self-defeating. Uh you could you could look at uh the uh Trump's plan to uh to bomb uh Iran as a tactic in this this plan of US hedgeimonyy. Uh but it's a tactic that is at the expense of long-term strategy. It's self-defeating. And you could just as the uh American NATO plan uh in Ukraine to bleed Russia and to impose sanctions on Russia backfired and uh had just the opposite effect of increasing uh Russia's self-sufficiency uh and strategy. every tactical uh move that the United States has impaired any possible success of its long-term strategy uh in uh actually locking other countries into uh the US dollarized international uh order and uh is obviously what is happening now has created such a revulsion among other countries as you can see in the United Nations discussions and the vote to uh s censor uh Israel uh and it should be to censor the Trump administration and the Biden administration for uh fully backing it and uh enabling uh it genocide. uh you you can you can see that the effect is to to uh speed up and catalyze the breakaway of 85% of the global majority from the from the US NATO uh center that had had been the old colonialism. Uh I want to since we're almost over I just want to say one thing about the time uh how I see what's happening. um uh in Iran. I don't think that Trump is going to bomb it while the stock market is still open. Uh remember uh last uh after our Thursday show uh we we thought well is the United States uh buildup uh in the uh Middle East simply trying to uh be a negotiating tactic to tell Iran, look, we're really serious. Well, then you had the Israeli attack on Iran that had been obviously planned for almost a year. The Israeli attack on Iran was not mainly from from Israel. It was within Iran by Israeli agents and US agents and British agents that had uh had prepared the attack on uh the defense facilities uh that Iran had against air attacks. Uh the Israeli attempts at air attacks have not been uh successful from Israel, only by local uh bomb owners. So I think that the United States is going to make a more serious attempt uh to attack. Uh but as in last weekend when the Israeli attacks began uh the u over the weekend the uh open the pre-trading uh of uh US uh stocks and uh oil prices showed uh stock market was going to go down on Monday. the oil prices were going to go up. But when trading opened, the stock market was up and actually went up and oil prices went down, not up. There's there's a kind of blindness in the uh the hundreds of billions of dollars of investors that actually believe that uh all of this is going to blow over and that the United States will successfully be able to lock in its uh control of uh the world's financial system, trading system and uh military uh supremacy and be able able to defeat China, Russia and Iran is leading the postc colonialism uh global south and the rest of the uh uh countries that uh had been col colonized by Europe. But remember the before the actual colonization that was primarily in the late 19th century you already had the uh newly independent republics uh from Latin America, Haiti, Greece uh then uh Egypt, Tunisia all uh run into debt dependency. They all issued uh bonds that almost immediately defaulted and led to uh the Europeans imposing monetary commissions to take control of the fiscal policy of these countries. This was independent of colonialism. This was purely financial character. Uh the uh the European control of uh countries already at that time uh uh was uh was pion pioneered. This is what the United States is trying to re to continue today. Not only colonialism explicitly of a military character by uh appointing uh direct control of governments but financial control and it's and uh dollarization. That's what ultimately all all of this is uh thought about by the United States. Uh and as I said, I spent uh uh my uh uh my 30s is my life, the 1970s in uh describing all this uh through my book superimperialism that explained uh all of this. And that was the Defense Department, the State Department, the White House, and the Treasury all uh followed exactly uh the logic that I'd spelled out in superimperialism, which I'd hoped would actually create a reaction against this. Uh the uh the US government strategists uh used it as a how to do it book uh uh instead. So, uh, that gave that that showed me at that time how all of what the explosion that we're seeing today was being put in place already in the early 1970s. If I could just add one final thing, Nemo, I know we're running out of time. Michael's comment make me want to reiterate once again so we don't miss it. the utter irrelevance of Europe to all that is going on here. Look, every strategist that I've read knows that if damage is done to Iran, one of the things Iran will do is close the straits of Hormuz there uh through which something like a quarter of the oil traffic in the world has to pass and which couldn't pass if they blocked it or threatened it with missiles in the that the Houthis have been doing in nearby. And who relies on the oil going through the Suez Canal and so forth? It's the Europeans. Where are they? They can't handle another spike inflation of their energy cost. They can't handle the one they're living through now. They worry each year about whether they get through the winter. That's where they are. and they're hemorrhaging industry and they're hemorrh to to drop on the tariffs. I mean it's too much. You are overstraining these societies and they have nothing to say. They're not at the relevant meeting. They're not in the relevant decisionmaking. They will of course live with the consequences. the United States will escape many of them. So it's again it's a testimony and if I'm right that we're looking for the end of colonialism then for Europe it is the end has already happened. They are whatever the opposite is of on top of the situation. They are underneath the situation. As the sparks explode, their houses will be set on fire. But other than watching it all, they have no role to play. It's an extraordinary step and moment in the history of colonialism's decline from its origins in Europe. Well, I have to point out that China and India are also very major customers of Iranian oil and uh that has been led to some discussion. Well, is Iran really going to sink a ship in the Gulf of Hermuz uh and impair uh impair China? Uh and uh we know that China has been sending airplanes uh uh to Iran. We don't we I have no idea at all what China's policy will be. But the Americans are willing to create this uh anarchy for Europe that uh Richard has just pointed out in order to say well look at how it's going to hurt China. uh and of course it'll also hurt uh uh hurt India and I don't know how that's going to affect uh Indian US relations but uh it the the disruption is going to be glo global way beyond uh uh Europe uh to it'll affect all of Asia and South as East Asia and South Asia uh and the United States will be able to remain largely immune in the sense that it is independent in oil but uh It's stock uh it's not it's stock market and uh financial markets are not independent uh and uh the the effect on the United States won't be on uh uh its inability to get oil but the fact that oil prices are going to go way up in pushing up inflation here as well. Uh exactly what uh Trump has said that uh he'd wanted to uh to avoid. So, it's going to destabilize the US economy just as much as uh the European uh Chinese and Indian economies. Yeah. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael. Great pleasure as always. Thank you, Nema. See you soon. Bye-bye.