When it comes to the conflict right now, the economic conflict between the United States and China, many people are asking what is the main strategy? What's your take, Michael? Let's start with you. What's your take on the way that the Trump administration is trying to talk about the strategy on their part? Even we've heard that CNN was reporting with talking with GOP Senator Ron Johnson. He said he has no idea what is the the strategy. What's your take on that, Michael? Well, when Bessant said that China had an unbalanced economy, what it meant was that it was successful and him for his idea a balanced economy is one without any government uh and ideally for Trump without any income tax. Uh so uh but that's not how China looks at it. China believes it's a mixed public private economy uh with the government playing uh the same kind of active role that it played in the United States industrial takeoff in the 19th century and that it played in Germany's takeoff and earlier in British mercantalism. The uh China knows that it already is the central uh provider and refiner of many raw materials that the uh the west needs. Uh and that if it's if indeed it says we're not going to be bullied, which is what its foreign minister has said, uh we're not going to negotiate when somebody says we're going to hurt you if you don't want what we say. We're we're going to raise tariffs and prevent you from trade. China's gone rope a dope. It says, "Okay, we're on with that. We're we stop uh you want to balance the trade more with this? Well, we're stopping uh our exports to you of critical materials. Uh we're we're stopped. We have a whole list of uh products that we're not going to uh send to you. These are the products that your industry needs without importing from China. American industry after a few months of depleting its reserves of uh parts uh pharmaceuticals, uh various chemicals, uh raw materials, the American economy will have to stop producing. And uh China has said well we're now going to need licenses to get uh the critical materials uh that we produce. And uh the uh China has the ability to stop to just uh interrupt America's production relations and assembly lines uh and just stop things. So it says fine. uh but I I talk often with uh uh Chinese policy makers and uh their their view is not that they will lose from the United States but they think the United States is committing economic suicide and mostly they think that America is going to end up the loser in this tariff war because uh it doesn't have an industrial policy. Simply imposing tariffs isn't industrial policy. It merely makes it more expensive for companies to import from their affiliates uh automobile parts from Canada and Mexico as we've discussed in past programs. Uh but al uh telephones and iPhones uh made by Amazon that are made there. shoes uh from uh Vietnam that are imported by the big uh uh shoe shoe company uh screws all all sorts of things and u China think sees above all that you know why why is America not recognizing why China has been so successful in developing what Americans call unbalanced and that is because China has kept uh public infrastructure in the public domain. It hasn't let it be been privatized. And the most important uh public uh utility that it's kept that uh neither America nor other western countries have kept in the public domain is money. China doesn't have a domestic financial class that makes money by speculating and buying out uh other companies uh buying out industry and de-industrializing or deciding let's uh find a cheaper way of doing this to lower uh the wage costs and make more profits. The whole aim of China is what used to be the aim of the United States and Germany and other countries. You raise wages in order to increase productivity and you provide basic infrastructure to uh provide basic needs, electricity, communications, you know, railroads uh at cost or at a subsidized rate so that the industrial companies don't have to pay their uh labor high enough wages to afford this uh services that monopolized in the United States. So, uh, China has made finance part of the industrial growth pattern and, uh, Trump, uh, and the United States is not. And Trump doesn't realize why the China is developing, but America isn't. He simply says they're developing and we're not. They're ahead of us, and that makes them the rival. We have to stop them. He doesn't say why don't we're doing what China's doing. Why don't we follow their model that's made them so successful? And the irony is that this model that has made China so successful is exactly the same model that the United States followed in the 19th century uh to develop its industrial takeoff. It's a model that Germany followed in the 19th century to follow its takeoff. There's a certain logic of how do you industrialize and you industrialize with a mixed economy and you take uh the banking system and you use it to finance industrial development not to create monopolies and uh create trusts and essentially try to make money at the expense of industry and the rest of the economy. there's no recognition of an industrial policy to back up industrial tariffs. So, the result is that uh Trump thinks that he'll win the war with China and the Chinese say, "Well, we're looking at uh who's trading what and who needs what. Uh if he wants to do that, let's uh uh let him go right ahead and and uh do what he's doing, and we'll see where the American economy stands in three months. Richard. Well, you know, just to piggyback off what Michael said, it's embarrassing. I I I listen to that clip of our Treasury Secretary and it's embarrassing what comes out of that man's mouth. I mean, I I'm beyond words almost in but but let me try. Why is it calling what the Chinese do somehow self-evident? They're technically smart people. He said that uh are aware that they shouldn't be doing this what they're doing. Uh let me remind everyone 70 years ago, China was among the poorest countries on this planet. It was a an exemplar of the depth of poverty. It was the place that Pearl Buck described in her book, The Good Earth, as almost beyond human suffering, the level of difficulty for their people. And over the last 75 years, and particularly over the last 30 or 35 years, they have become one of the economic powerhouses of the modern world. Why in the world would you want to call that not what it is, what Michael says, success? Of course, it's success. They've become the manufacturing center of the world in that period of time. They are the I mean it it blows my mind. I recently saw a map of bullet trains in China. their the the complex network of their super fast chain chains. The the only thing in the United States that comes close is the Asella, the the train line that runs from Boston to Washington, which is only slightly faster than the convention. We basically have no bullet trains. And they've connected every place in China with bullet trains. By the way, Michael reminds us what was the big breakthrough of the 19th century. The trains which unified the country which opened up the Midwest to the rest of the world so it could become the the food producer, the grain producer, transforming everybody else. The Chinese are the success story of our time. You know, earlier government administrations in the United States wanted to make the Chinese uh change their regime, change their system. We justified bringing them into the World Trade Organization because that was going to make them like us. But there's no reason for them to be like us. They don't want to be have slow economic growth. In 2024, according to the IMF, US economic growth about 2.8%, Chinese economic growth about 5%. And now I know there'll be the conventional nonsense about how you can't trust Chinese numbers. I have heard that story uninterrupted for 30 years. Now it's beginning to fade away since obviously it was nonsense all along. and it's nonsense now. And by the way, those are IMF numbers, not numbers from China. So the the crucial reality here is that it's the American government that's in trouble. It's the American empire that's declining and it's the American capitalist system that has dug itself into a hole. If for the last 40, 50 years you have run a trade imbalance, which we basically have since the 1970s, and you've paid for it by a massive export of dollars that come back as debt, you're deepening a level of debt that will one day lead people to hesitate to absorb more debt. That's what happened on Monday of this week. That's why the the bond market freaked them all out. Look, it it it destroyed a British government two or three prime ministers ago when she the woman Liz Truss when she tried to push beyond the level of debt that people will give London, crippling that economy still further. They're in trouble here. and the imposition of tariffs. I mean, let me take another way of getting it. The president of the United States declared economic war on the whole rest of the world by a tariff on every country with a handful of exceptions. Nobody has ever done that before. What is this? This is not a sign of a calm, collected. This is desperation economics. And if you doubted it, the on again off again just shows you how desperate they are. Two days of something, Monday it has to be reversed because the bond market goes crazy. And then Wednesday it has to be reversed because our allies are going to hurt us back. The Chinese showing it. Even the Europeans courageless as they so often nowadays are are are thinking maybe to find some resource. But this is not the United States of the 20th century. This is the United States going down and flailing around with these gestural policies. On again, off again. Wow. This is and the whole world one last point the whole world is been given a gift. My old teacher Gayorg Wilhelm Friedri would have told me to expect this. Mr. Trump attacks the world for cheating and hopes it will get him by doing what he's doing. What he has given is a gift to every other leader of every other country who will now be able to point to the economic problems of his or her country and blame Mr. Trump. He has taught them and there'll be a grain of truth to it because the tariffs make a difference. hurt people in his country and they're going to yell in every country and their leaders are going to have to blame someone and Mr. Trump has shown them how to do that. Blame him and there'll be more truth to their doing that than there was to Mr. Trump who initiated it. As Mr. Hegel would have said, his plan was to burden the rest of the world and make them pay for the problems he has. his result, they will blame him. The opposite is buried right in what he did. And he doesn't seem to understand any of that and he keeps doing it. 90 days were to wait. In other words, the uncertainty of the last few weeks will now be for the next three months. What? May, June, July, nobody knows how to make an investment, where to make it. You won't know what the supply chains are because you don't know where the tariffs will or will not be or for how long they'll be or for what height. How do you make a decision? You don't. You wait. And as Mr. Canes told us, "When the employer class waits, we all discover how capitalism makes the mass of us hostage to what the few of us do with their profits. If they don't roll them over and spend them, we're screwed." And suddenly, what are we looking at? Stagnation from the holding back, from the uncertainty, coupled with inflation from the tariffs. And we get that stagflation horror that comes back to haunt us. This is chaotic economic policy born of desperation whose likely outcome is going to be lot of trouble. I don't think it's born of desperation at all. Trump is not desperate. Uh he uh is quite confident that he has a solution uh to the problem. Uh and I think if we take a step back, we realize that the uh this whole tariff issue isn't really about uh tariffs at all. Uh Trump and the Republicans have one political aim above all others and that's what behi is behind what he's doing. They want to cut taxes above all for the progressive taxation that falls mainly on the highest incomes uh and on personal wealth. uh and it seems that at some point uh Trump must have asked some economists whether there was any alternative way for governments to finance themselves. He said, "How do we cut taxes? What can we do?" And somebody must have told him that uh actually from the time of American independence in 1776 all the way through the eve of World War I by far the dominant form of government revenue was customs revenue from tariffs. So you can see that a light bulb uh went off in Trump's brain. Tariffs don't fall on his own rontier class of real estate, financial and monopoly billionaires. Tariffs fall primarily on labor also on industry for imports of necessary raw materials and parts. But the whole idea of uh introducing tariffs is he said the more tariff revenues we can raise the more income taxes we can cut. And right now before Congress uh uh uh the Republicans uh are and uh Trump are saying it's time to renew all of the uh vast tax cuts that Trump enacted in his first administration. That is what pushed the US u budget into deficit to begin with. Trump want Trump uh claims that tariffs can uh enable the United States to keep his tax cuts and uh replace uh the taxes and he wants to cut taxes even more on the wealthiest classes. uh is if somehow this is going to uh create an incentive for the wealthiest co classes, the financial classes, the monopolists, the real estate people to uh rebuild American industry. It's as if giving more wealth to the financial managers, they're the ones who've de-industrialized the American economy. uh giving them more money will simply repeat the industrial takeoff that was peaking in the 1890s under the president that Trump idealizes uh William McKenley. Well, what his narrative leaves out of account is that tariffs were merely the precondition for nurturing industry by the government in a mixed public private economy. Just like China has a a mixed uh public private economy, the government shaped markets in ways that were designed to minimize the cost of living and doing business. And that public nurturing is what gave uh the United States uh its competitive international advantage uh in industry. But given Trump's guiding economic aim to untax himself and his most influential uh political constituency, what appeals to him is simply the fact that government didn't have an income tax. It was able to finance itself through tariffs. He Why can't it do it uh uh today? uh and it's as if all that uh enabled America's remarkable industrial takeoff to occur was cutting tariffs and uh uh also what appeals to Trump is the super affluence of a robber baron class in whose rank you can imagine he thinks of himself as joining the ranks of uh the robber barons and this self-indulgent class consciousness has a blind spot regarding how its own drives and predatory uh income and wealth destroy the economy uh around it. Uh it's as if the robber barons made money by organizing and driving industry. He Trump is unaware that the guilded age of the 1890s did not emerge as part of America's industrial strategy for success or that the great fortunes were made uh possible by the failure to regulate monopolies and the failure to uh tax rier income. If you read a book uh Gustavas Meyers, history of the great American fortunes told the story of how railroad and real estate monopolists were carved out at the expense of the economy at large. And uh the the Democrats and Republicans alike in the 1990s said we've got to prevent this uh these Robert Bearing class. So they passed the Sherman antitrust law in 1890. Uh then came Teddy Roosevelt, the trustbuster, uh stopping them. And then came the finally an introduction of the American income tax in 1913. And what was so unique about this tax is that it only fell on 2% of the Americans. Uh you only the very rich had to file a tax return. And who were the very rich? They were the monopolists. Uh they were the real estate uh magnets. And most of all they were the the bankers uh and the financeers who were uh trying to turn the economy into a trust economy and who were trying to fight against government regulation against uh government uh policy to uh shape an industrial economy. And uh so what admire what Trump admires in the 1890s and the late 19th century is everything that ended this whole uh centurylong development of an industrial philosophy and policy to enrich America. So, uh he's in he's admiring uh the dismantling of uh uh the dynamic of monopolization, of financialization, of uh uh anti-government legislation that is the opposite of what made America rich. That's what makes all of this so ironic. Richard, just Richard, here is what Donald Trump said about the why has he decided to to pause tariffs on some countries and we know that China is not one of them like because you said that these tariffs would go in effect on Monday. You said no pause and today there is a pause. So um today yeah it's not a question of that you have to have flexibility. Uh, I could say, "Here's a wall and I'm going to go through that wall. I'm going to go through it no matter what and keep going." And you can't go through the wall. Sometimes you have to be able to go under the wall, around the wall, or over the wall. These guys know that better than anybody, right? You got to go around them. Sometimes you're not going to go through them. So, I I consider, you know, I I think in financial markets, cuz they change. Look how much it changed today. We went from uh you know pretty moderate today but over the last few days it looked pretty glum to I guess they say it was the biggest day in financial history. That's a pretty big change. And I I think the word would be flexible. You have to be flexible like he's Richard. How how do you characterize the US donor class as Michael was talking about and it its influence on policy? Well, they seem to me to live in a fantasy world that they can do things that clearly they can't do anymore. For me, the the overwhelmingly interesting thing is, as I keep saying, that they live in a world in which the United States's economic, political, ideological, cultural, and military position are weakening. That's why the military strategists keep saying time is on China's side, not ours in this conflict. But he doesn't want to face any of that. he's going to do this, that, and the other thing. No, he isn't. It isn't going to work for him. Uh, a declining empire does not have the options that a rising empire does. The last time we tried to with the tariffs was in a time of the rising US empire. That's gone. That's over. We didn't have a major competitor of the on the scale that the Chinese are today back then. And by the way, Mr. McKinley got the tariff through when he was a representative. By the time he became a president, he turned against the policy of of tariffs because he got into too much difficulty from the very class that Michael is talking about. He Michael is right. There's no question that deep below all of the rest of this BS is a desire to avoid what for him is a catastrophe, which is the expiration of the tax cut that was passed in 2017 if that is allowed to expire. And that legislation has a selfending uh I believe on the 31st of December of this year. So if he doesn't get that problem solved, his donor class will get an enormous tax increase comparable to the one day decrease that they got eight years ago. So he has to deal with that. And Michael is also right. He's promised more tax cuts on top of making sure that that other tax cut doesn't expire. And given that we're already projected to have almost a $2 trillion deficit now, he he's looking at unbelievable risks of a bond market breakdown because people won't lend to the United States anymore because it's too dangerous to do. It is what happened to Liz Truss in England not so long ago. She tried to come up with a budget that looked like, oh, we will borrow more. No, said the bond market. We're not going to lend you anymore. And and her proposal disappeared and she disappeared. She's gone out of political politics in out of politics in Britain. I I don't make predictions. But Mr. Trump, who has had in the long historical sweep of things a meteoric rise to the top, could very well now be on the cusp of an equally meteoric rise down into oblivion because this doesn't work. There is an element here that people should understand. to the degree that people and businesses around the world lower their prices in order to hold on to the American market despite the tariffs, then Mr. Trump will have achieved at least a part of what he's after. He will have made the rest of the world pay a tribute to the United States because that's what it is. You want to do business here, you pay us. And the way you pay us is you lower the price of your exports here. That way, the American people can keep buying them. The price will not go up and the revenues from the tariffs will be paid to the American government and it will be at the expense of the foreigners. They don't want it. They will be looking to every way to evade it. they will be likely to be successful. So the end result is that Mr. Trump will get a small portion of the fantasy he thinks is waiting there for him. That's for me what's going on. And again that only get it if the rest of the world pays tribute. And that is going to make every other leader receive the rage and the bitterness of all those other countries who are being required to pay that tribute. And that's a wellspring of hostility that makes the United States, not China, the world's rogue nation in everybody's mind, US allies and enemies alike. This is an extraordinarily risky ploy to undertake.