Hi everybody. Today's Thursday, November 13, 2025 and our friend our friends Michael Hudson and Richard Wolf are back with us. Welcome back. >> Glad to be here. >> And please subscribe and hit like button helping us reaching more people. And let me start Michael with you and what has happened with Donald Trump and his sort of policies in Central Asia. He's talking about Donald Trump says that he's going to reconquer the heartland. Central Asia really what's going on in your opinion when it comes you he's talking about the investment 30 35 billion dollar tobakistan and they're talking about Kasakistan and maybe the base is going back to these countries what is the importance of the central Asia in your opinion Mike >> well the ostensible uh aim that he's talked about is having American companies invest in tungsten and rare earth. Uh Kazakhstan has a very heavy tungsten holds and America thinks that it can replace reliance on China for tungsten and the dream of Trump the almost obsession is rare earth. Uh but I just don't see Kazakhstan being really much of a source of rare earth. the uh American oil companies have invested heavily in Kazakhstan and Kyrgystan and it was a disaster. It was called ecoside. The uh oil workers unions all rose up and fought against it and there's a very strong anti- uh uh American feeling certainly against American mining companies and oil companies uh throughout Central Asia. And that's basically what Trump is going to be fighting about. Uh and he's hoping that the financing for this is not going to come from the US government. It's going to come from uh the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. And uh they were who originally brought neoliberalism to Kazakhstan and Central Asia and it was a disaster. Uh what happened in central Asia is pretty much what happened in the Baltics. Local kleptocracies took over. They registered the property in their own names. They made deals with the western companies uh for payoffs and kept their money uh in the west. They uh took all of the best housing for themselves. And the uh IMF and the World Bank introduced the rule of law meaning that uh it enabled the governments to foreclose on uh debtors uh home people who bought their houses on credit and uh there micro credit was uh the big thing that was sponsored by the Americans and the uh uh IMF uh by the neoliberals. It it devast it worked mainly through women because you could bring social pressure on the women to repay uh all of the debts and the suicide rates went up. And so the women actually led the opposition to the western influence throughout uh Kazakhstan and Kurdistan and the other uh countries there. Uh and so the the original reaction against the uh the Soviet Union has given way now to a general feeling that things were much better back then. At least people had security of their housing. There wasn't the polarization and there wasn't a wealthy billionaire class that has have emerged in these countries and uh nepotism by the rulers of these countries to their own personal families. It's really back to the 19th century in a way. So what we're seeing is uh it's more about minerals now. Uh the 19th century it was more about crops and opium and uh things like that. But all of this is really just a replay of what was called the great game or the British called it the eastern question. a long fight between Britain and Russia and now the United States uh against Russia and China for control of everything from Iran all the way across central Asia to the wiger sections of western China. So uh you're you're you're seeing this geopolitical game with mining companies uh playing the role and uh the mining companies are probably the most uh unpopular countries in the entire region there. So that uh we haven't heard a word about what China and Russia are doing and I think they're just letting uh America try to play its cards. But last week the uh Kazakhstan uh foreign minister was in in Washington uh trying to talk up uh Kazakhstan is as a to make deals and uh that seems to certainly uh the existing government is trying to make a deal uh that's going to uh to benefit all uh and I think the deal they they met with the the secretary of commerce Howard Lutnik who had negotiated a deal for the Kazakhstan railroad railways before uh and there's now uh a proposal between the Kovkas a capital uh capital fund to invest in mining produ and uh some kind of profit sharing agreement uh with Kazakhstan that may not know all the intricacies of the Hollywood accounting that doesn't really leave many profits to be shared after paying all of the interest charges and management charges and other charges that are uh all put down. So uh the the this the tension the great game now is between uh neoliberal mining interests and uh what the Kazakhstan people are calling ecoside destruction of the environment from all of the pollution and the spills that the oil companies have called and uh uh China China's belt and road initiative on quite different terms and with a different philosophy from neoliberalism. So it's it's not only a geopolitical game now it's a game between what kind of economic arrangements are going to be made. Will they be uh those of more or less uh socialist type bricks arrangements or will they be the neoliberal arrangements that the United States is trying to uh push right now? >> Richard. Yeah. >> I would add two dimensions to it. One, this strikes me as stunningly a replay of 19th and 20th century uh imperialism. This this is western countries in this case the United States seeing the opportunity for profit by either mining which is as old as imperialism you know that goes back to gold and silver and all the other things that have been luring uh Europeans to go all over the world looking for places where they can get it cheaply or uh steal it or whatever is necessary because it is so nicely liquid for them to use in the way they want. Sure, add tungsten, add rare earths. It was always shifting with the technologies that we have available which determine which resource under the ground is more extractively interesting for profit than the other. So now there's these new ones and now there's a new place to go get them and the United States is going to try to do it, get other people to pay for it, you know, despoil the environment. That's what they always did. This this is not new. And I want to remind someone of a lesson. And the lesson is that the countries that were able to break away from the global capitalist imperialist arrangement. Russia in the 20th century and China now are the success stories they were that Russia was then under the Soviet Union. I want to remind people since it's so fashionable not to know this that Soviet economic growth from the time of the revolution in 1917 till the time of the dissolution in 1989 was the success story of the 20th century. the most backward European country that had to go through ready losing World War I, then a civil war and a revolution and then collectivization of agriculture and then World War II still came out at the end of the century having grown faster than anybody else despite all of those setbacks. Extraordinary story and China we all know is the other one. And what do they have in common? They were not part of the they broke away from the colonial capitalist system. They're the success stories. The ones who did not allow what they're discussing for Kyrgystan or Kazakhstan at this point. That's the first thing. The second observation just adding to what Michael talked about is I am very aware and perhaps I am misguided here. I am aware that all the minations the 76 because I keep count the 76 dead people that were killed in those boats the so-called narco boats in the Caribbean and the Pacific. I'm aware that that is a process together with the positioning of the aircraft carrier Gerald Ford that is now uh off the coast of Venezuela. I'm aware that there's a positioning to do a little res regime change in Venezuela in order to reaffirm the Monroe Doctrine and to grab one of the great oil repositories on this planet. And here comes the punchline. The Russians, with the implicit backing of the Chinese, have warned the United States not to do that. Now, this this is an important granted still symbolic, but an important step. It's that the Monroe Doctrine has just been nullified. The United States does not have some sort of understood right to dominate in the Western Hemisphere. The Russians are announcing they're here too. And if the Russians are there with ships and navy, which they apparently are, and then the Chinese are not far behind. And my suspicion is part of the attractiveness of having these meetings in the White House is for Mr. Trump to say, "Okay, if I have to take seriously you in the Western Hemisphere, well, you're going to have to take me seriously uh even more than you thought you did. Look here, I'm I'm doing stuff right in your neighborhood here with with the Central Asian uh governments." So you do have this geopolitical maneuvering around uh the very you know it's part of the fluid adjustment of the world to the fact that the the west is not the dominant economic player anymore and everybody the west included is remmaneuvering trying to figure out how to stay afloat in this rapidly shifting global situation. Yeah. >> Well, I think you're right to bring up the Monroe Doctrine because uh the flip side of that was a promise that uh Europe you stay out of the Western Hemisphere, we'll stay out of your hemisphere and uh that's exactly not happening. So, you're quite right, you know, when you say uh the Russia and China are saying you you've broken the deal. You've come over here. Okay, tit for tat. uh sim this is what we're doing is symmetrical to your uh reactions and uh your actions and basically you're seeing Russia and China in this reacting against the west but again all of this goes back to uh the mckender's heartland versus uh the uh the Brit British controlled uh sea coast and commercial areas of the the whole idea of central a of China's and Russia's uh mainly China's uh plans for the last uh 20 years has [clears throat] been to expand overland through uh central Asia. There's a whole uh attempt to build railroads. All of this was replayed in the late 19th century u starting uh with Persia when it was the Persian Empire that controlled most of this region. Uh and in the uh late 18th century uh Russia had reconquered what had been the northern Persian Empire. Azerbaijan uh the uh Georgia uh part of uh Dagasan uh were there. the uh a a kahar a dynasty, a local tribal dynasty uh took over the sha of Iran uh the Kar tribe in 1789 and ruled it until 1925 and essentially reconquered this area. Russia then conquered it back and uh the the Russia then used this conquest of what had been northern Persia to extend the railroad all the way through uh Kazakhstan uh and central Asia uh further uh west further further east. Well, Britain opposed all of this and uh it fought the Crimean War against Russia to say Russia is our existential enemy. You can look at the US and China today. That was Russia and Britain uh back in in the uh Crimean War. And uh the uh the sequel uh to that was the Anglo-Persian war uh se 1856 to 1857 over who's going to control the route to Afghanistan which uh Persia Persia had controlled and it was fought over the city of Hat in western Afghanistan and the the the British said we've got to block Russia from getting uh access to India because India was still the crown jewel that was uh giving the financial support for uh the British Empire and essentially uh defeated Russia uh defeated Persia and uh took control of that and the next half century all the way through the late 19th century saw Russia and uh the British both asking for concessions to build a railroad uh through this region. which was still largely under uh Persian control. Well, they were able to block each other and Persia didn't wasn't able to build a railroad until finally in the mid 1930s the state did. uh it was afraid of getting foreign concessions and the trauma of British investment uh all the way from Persia further east was uh so destructive that uh there was the there was a a general pro-Russian feeling and after the Russian revolution uh the Russians had a the support of the population uh in these regions and there was ongoing warfare uh o over, you know, who was going to control everything from uh Persia that didn't become Iran until later u and central Asia. And uh basically the uh the British intervened with the military and uh settled things by overthrowing the Khar dyn tribal dynasty with uh the the sha the two sha sha zapalave dynasty the father and the son that who uh did a police state uh when Persia granted an oil concession to Darcy uh of England in 1901 that led to the discovery of oil a decade later and uh it was to keep after uh I think what happened after that in Persia is what's going to happen in central Asia uh the uh the Iranians elected Mosed as a a leader in the early 1950s the uh the the British MI6 and the CIA overthrew him and inter and the sha tightened up a police state that was so uh awful uh so oppressive that the only place that people were able to meet to resist was in the mosques and the result is that uh there was an uh a Shiite leadership uh revolution that uh over overthrew the sha this is pretty much what happened in the 1890s when the opposition to the British takeover of Persia's tobacco and um opium trade uh was uh opposed primarily by the religious leaders who imposed a fatwa against smoking. Uh and all of the water pipes were all broken and the essentially the uh sha who uh the kahar tribal sha who had ruled for 50 years was assassinated and uh the the British put in their own proxies. some uh this is the kind of fight that you're going to be seeing with the color what's now called the color revolution uh in Southeast Asia. the u the if the US plans for mining and for control and the support of the neoliberal kleptocracy succeeds in this area. There's going to be the same kind of revolution that there have been in other countries and uh it's it's this is going to be the dynamic that's going to shape the next decade. Yeah, Richard, really what what's going on with the case of Kasakistan and Usbekistan? They both they're both deeply connected to China's belt and road initiative and Russia's Eurasian economic union and you know looking at the reality of the region can these countries realistically pivot toward Washington without jeopardizing their existing strategic dependencies? >> I doubt it. uh I doubt it a great deal and I'll tell you two reasons why. one, there's a part of the history that I can add to everything that Michael just said, which is in Persia as a resistance against what was being done by the British and by those parts of Persian society that were allied to the British was to develop one of the most one of the largest and most well-developed communist parties, the TUDA party uh in the world. Uh this kind of behavior by the west didn't just provoke the religious opposition. It did and for the time being that became quite dominant right into the present. But that religious opposition existed and coexisted with a very powerful secular opposition which in the case of Iran and Persia was the Tuda party which had to be ruthlessly destroyed so that the religious opposition could survive. And the that continues. The oppositions inside Iran to this day have their roots in that TUDA party in many many ways which the people of Iran have explained to me on a countless occasions. So I would be careful because I think this kind of behavior that we're seeing this sort of if you like it renewal of classical imperialism will it may strengthen in some ways religious opposition but it will also give a whole new lease on life to a non religious to a secular socialist or communist resistance which has deep roots there. The second reason I expect that is because the ability of Russia and China separately and together to help that TUDA based opposition revive is much greater than anything that Russia or China had been able to do before. and they will now have a vested interest in being the support to an anti- west basis that already exists there on many levels. So yeah, you might re-engage that old battle the way Michael has sketched it out, but the conditions and the the strength of the relative players there is not what it was the first time. And so I think now the second time the outcome will be quite different. >> Yeah. There's a very good uh book that was published uh uh I think in 2021 but uh called by uh Baher Sanger and Almyra uh Sibaldiaga I'm pronouncing it wrong. Gruntier Capitalism and its discontents uh power, morality and resistance in Central Asia. Uh I wrote the introduction to that book and I I'm I'll put it on my website uh today uh because it it describes exactly the trauma that occurred when US uh oil companies came into this region and uh in conjunction with the neoliberal uh rules that sort of uh have led this region to be more receptive to the Chinese built and road. Uh the Chevron set its size on these vast oil reserves uh especially in uh Kazakhstan's Tangis oil field and uh what Kazakhstan wanted simply was western expertise. It wanted to uh develop it itself. uh and uh but what Chevron wanted was control and that's what the US uh any US mining company uh in uh this region is going to want the same kind of control. It'll promise the government control, but it uh the way that the uh uh IMF and World Bank have imposed free market rules, is there's really nothing that the state can do to penalize these countries for all the pollution that their mining is going to cause, especially for the rare earths. And uh Trump has said, well, we can get half of America's rare earth needs uh just from uh Kazakhstan. Well, that's uh really crazy if you look at the fact that uh how long it's going to take to build all of these how long uh uh these uh mining facilities, what who's going to do the refining? Will it be done in Kazakhstan or will it all be sent as ores are now being sent to China to do uh who's uh who's going to uh to do the production? the the agreement seems so simple the way that Trump and the Americans uh describe it and they always screw the host countries in the small print of the contract that really uh say well anything you do to uh to enforce cleanup costs and uh any damage we control will just sue you through the international dispute uh uh investment dispute court and you'll have to just pay us uh not only you'll have to pay us the uh us the damages but uh we'll you'll arrest your lawyer like we did for the South Ecuador I think the lawyer who defended against Chevron's uh pollution there you know we'll just make life hell for you and uh I think that the uh I I would not be surprised to see Russia and China uh give a whole uh uh scenario of uh what may happening uh may may happen to these countries if they actually let the new mining companies do to them what uh Chevron uh has has done uh the the Chevron promised the agreement 80% of the production and uh uh reflected this 80 20% production sharing profit sharing agreement but it turns out that uh the Kazakhstan ended up with only 2% of the project's revenue. It was a disaster. Uh 2% instead of what was for all of this oil that it was getting. It was the most unfavorable oil contract that had been negotiated in uh the last few decades and uh Kazakhstan still living with the aftermath of that. So it has not had a good experience uh with western investment. Same thing in Kyrgystan. It suffered in a similar way from the gold mining uh uh uh polluters. The these also came in and gold mining is very pollution polluting uh as of course is the rare earth and tungsten and uh they've had uh a very uh unfortunate thing and the authors the book that I just mentioned uh I'll I'll read what they say. The neoliberal investment rules regime binds governments to agreements signed with transnational corporations. If agreements are violated, investors feel justified to take host country state to international arbitration for damages. The rule of law claimed that the state cannot infringe individual rights and freedoms and that the domain of private property must be protected from majoritarian politics. Uh so neoliberalism did not get rid of state planning. It turned over what was Soviet planning to uh the large corporations and uh the uh the transnational firms in these countries. That's what they've already been experienc experiencing. And I'm sure that the governments want uh uh money now. And I'm sure that as in the case of uh past investments uh all the way from uh 19th century Persia with its tobacco uh concessions to mining concessions today there's all sorts of uh bribery going on to officials uh covertness. That's uh how the system works. That's the crime is part of the free market. Um and I think Tony said that uh not all property is theft, but most theft becomes property. Uh, and I think that's what you've seen in Central Asia so far. And it's probably going to it's the US game plan for that region. >> And you have to notice the international law there. They're protecting private property from majoritarian. What a wonderful word. It you could have said democracy, but you didn't. You got rid of that term and you substituted something that sounds different. Majority. We shouldn't let the majority have a have have a decisive role there. You know, when you do that, all you're doing is postponing the revolution that comes to demand what the majoritarian system was supposed to give you as a peaceful way of resolving these sorts of differences. It it you have to always shake your head in the wonder at what was possible. And I'm not surprised that the Trump people, what else is their model? They don't have anything in their head but the last two or 300 years of capitalist imperialism. What else should occur to them? These are not critics. They're not steeped in a revolutionary or rebellious or socialist or whatever word you want alternative way of thinking. No, they deal with what exists, the capitalist system and how they're going to keep it going. And if they need tungsten and if they need rare earths, then they look around the world uh and and go and invest in control wherever it is. I'm reminded of the the the way the British Empire worked. You know, once the United States became independent and now could develop and discover that in its territory was something that world capitalism wanted. And in the 19th century, what world capitalism wanted above all else [snorts] was cotton because the world was learning to dress itself in cotton cloth of one kind or another. And the American South, once you were able to bring black Africans to work, it was a source of the cotton. And the British Empire was now faced with the fact they have to pay for the cotton because they didn't have the colony anymore. So they would have to pay these Americans. So the word went out in the British Empire that they should work at Q Gardens in outside of London to plant cotton in every conceivable way to see where in the world cotton could grow that they could harvest for their cotton industry. That's why Uganda is a cotton plantation. Why Egypt is the source of cotton? They they tried it everywhere. Where it didn't work, they forgot it. Where it did, they came down with their colonial regime to make sure they got it. And they got a century of really good money out of their cotton textiles by giving the small African farmers of Uganda nothing, you know, and by giving the peop most of the people in Egypt nothing and so on and so it's ju we're just replaying that old game again with with in new areas with new rule uh issues that have to be gotten. But the framework is exactly the same >> and it's a short-term framework ultimately. I mean neo ne uh imperialism neoliberalism uh is basically uh extractive. It looks for short-term gains hit and run. Uh in at a certain point you're forced to run because finally there is a revolution uh to to throw them over. uh China is playing and Russia uh in this region are playing the long game and the long game always works out in the end. The question is how long is it going to take Central Asia to become part of the long game? And what can uh China and Russia do now uh to counter the uh the attempt that uh any regime change uh against any country that resists the expansion of the US mining interests to the US uh you have the equivalent of uh your your cotton example. The US simply sees uh South uh Central Asia as a source of minerals to replace China. Uh China is has is able to say well we want to go beyond being a monoculture. Being a monoculture is what's impoverished you. Being a monoculture, a minerals monoculture, whether it's oil or tungsten or rare earth, is going to create a a small layer of a client oligarchy, a client kleptocracy as you have had you wrote throughout the Soviet states or are you going to have the social revolution? Well, of course, that's what Russia did in uh Persia, which is, as you correctly say, the Communist Party was very strong there before the uh mass uh murders and assassination pinochet style uh by the sha at the hands of the MI6 and uh CIA direction uh there. So, uh you're it I could imagine that there could be a dirty war and uh dirty politics uh all of that uh uh coming out of that with uh what is is Southeast Asia going to have a a kleptocratic klepto centralized bureaucracy state or will it be a kind of I like the term majoritarian state that is probably the political tactic that China is going to use to say if you have our belt and road, you'd much rather have us extend the money to develop your economy than having it done through the IMF and World Bank and uh and the corporations that are going to borrow the money on Wall Street, invest there, and then all the profits are going to be absorbed by paying interest for us to pay interest to our own uh bankers and our own offshore financial corporations and management corporations really leaving nothing for you. That's the That's the Hollywood accounting or you could just say the uh the the neo neoliberal accounting that's used to prevent host countries from getting the benefits of their uh natural resources. And the whole attempt by the US there is to prevent these countries from uh using their patrimony, their natural resources as their tax base. Well, of course, that's just what Adam Smith and the uh the whole classical economists John Stewart Mill Marx and the socialists were all advocating for Europe. Get rid of the r get rid of the rontier class. Get rid of the landlords. Use land rent and natural resource rent is the tax base. That's what Ricardo was very uh clear about in his analysis. That's uh and China can pick up this classical economic idea of a free market. A free market is one free from uh the rent extraction uh natural resource or land rent or mineral rent uh extraction. China wants Central Asia to be able to tax the uh the uh revenue [clears throat] from its uh oil uh tungsten other raw materials to use that to pay for the capital investments in the belt and road initiative that China wants to build. And so this what you're seeing unfolding in Central Asia is the fight who is going to get the natural resource rent. Will it be paid to the western uh private uh oil companies and mining companies uh and leave uh the uh central Asian governments without these natural resources as a meaningless tax as a meaningful tax base uh and they'll have to tax the population at at large preventing their industrial takeoff or will they do will they say no uh the state owns all of these we will do what we originally wanted to do with oil and what was promised us when we first talked to the American interests that uh they would give us the expertise uh to develop uh our oil. We will then get the profits and we will use it to develop our country. That didn't happen the first time around. There has to be a learning curve here. And if it and uh China now has its vested interest in promoting this learning curve to say you uh use your natural resources not to be uh you can export all of the raw materials you want to the west. We want you to export it source of earnings source of dollar earnings. That is what will enable you to uh compensate us for the built and road investment that we're trying to make to develop your whole economy. That will benefit uh uh the population at large by being more than just an extractive industry but uh setting up uh smallcale industry uh larger scale industry uh modernize your agriculture etc. That's what is going to be unfolding in the next decade. Richard, the United States already faces overextension in Europe and the Indo-Pacific and the question would be can they meaningfully compete in the Central Asia without draining attention from its other strategic theaters considering China's presence in Central Asia is not just economic, it's infrastructural and institutional through SEO and bricks. >> Yeah. I was about to say the same thing from a different angle. Uh in classic imperialism, you had the European countries, Britain, France, Germany, Belgium and and so on all using the same logic, the same system. And the remarkable thing now is that China, Russia, particularly China have a different system. But that alone isn't enough. They're also the wealthier economic block in the world. They have more money to provide to Central Asia if it comes right down to it. You add up the GDPs of the bricks nations and it far outdistances the total GDP of the G7. This these are no longer equal part equal competitors. The Chinese have look what they've been doing. The belt and road is an enormous outlay of money that the Chinese have to do such a thing. It's not just a nice plan. It's not just a a a profit grab. It is a long-term investment of an enormous amount of money. And now that the United States has basically declared war on the rest of the economy with that tariff craziness, they have created an incentive for the Chinese, for the bricks, but for almost every other country to look elsewhere than the United States in the years ahead to do business. Because dealing with the United States now that it has turned into a nationalist national security fetishizing system is an unreliable partner. It's an unreliable place to sell. Look what the tariffs can do. It's an unreliable place to buy because everything is weaponized in this American system now. and you don't know whether your dependence on importing something I mean there aren't that many things the United States is important in exporting anymore anyway but but for whatever it is that's not reliable everybody is try everybody is trying to find secure business partners where in the Chinese orbit or at least in the non-American orbit because it's safer to be diverse ified out of dependence on the United States. This means that the United States, as you put it, Nema, and you're right, uh is not in a good position to engage in a struggle with Russia and China in in Central Asia. Putting aside a military engagement, but in an economic competition, the odds aren't so good for the United States at this point. all kinds of pro. Even Kazakhstan and Kystan must wonder. They must wonder if what they're going to be doing is getting an awful lot of money to do an awful lot of mining to sell an awful lot of exports to the United States. They're getting deeper into a dependence when the whole world is telling you go the other direction, have less of a dependence on them. Here's the joke you might think of. The Americans lead them to borrow from the IMF. They develop all these instruments. They have a revolution and they sell the tungsten and the rare earths to China. Yeah, >> think about because you need to think that way now and that's a reasonable way to think of the law of events. That's what's changed exactly that in the world. >> Yeah. >> Nemo, were you going to make an announcement? >> Yeah. Go ahead. >> No, you I thought you were going to make it. >> Yeah. I I think for our audience if you want to follow Michael Hudson and Richard Wolf you can see just below their names you can find their websites you can go democracy at work for richard.info info and Michael you can go there and michael-hudson.com and you can go and find whatever Michael is producing a lot of stuff Richard just these are two the most they don't they do everything about the economy and what's going on and the other point is Richard as we we were talking about before coming up that many people are still in the the videos that we're making these talks that we're and we cannot go after them because there are a lot. It's so it's it's impossible. >> Let me say a word about Nema just to to reinforce it. Uh I call these fake videos what they are and I'm talking mostly about those of of my work, but I suspect it's the same for for everybody. Um, if you're good at at computer, if you're good at video, if you know how to use AI and so forth, it what is being produced are videos that have my face or something that looks like it articulating a whole argument and it's my mouth and words sound like my voice. All of that is manufactured. It's not me. It is some other people are taking for example in one case the upper part of my face so I'm recognizable for people that are used to seeing me and then the lower part is somebody else's mouth articulating a script that I didn't write and has nothing to do with me and the whole thing is packaged as here is Richard Wolf and people know enough about the work I do that. I I guess folks out there can charge money to people who want to see that video and they then collect the money and they simply used me as so much raw material. Now, I got very worried as as you can imagine because you could imagine they could put in literally the opposite of what I'm saying. Now, so far they haven't done that. Although maybe I will now get emails showing me that they have. But so far what we've seen is not ideologically or analytically opposite, but it's just make believe. It is just somebody else's creation. Therefore, if you want to be sure it's actually me, yes, go to democracyatwork website.info. Go to Democracy at Work YouTube channel. Go to Democracy at Work Substack. All of those are our We only put our own stuff up there. That way you can be sure it's not a fake. >> Well, it's the same on my site, but uh specifically about Neoth's shows. Uh, I've uh my uh people have [clears throat] been sending me copies of Nema's shows with Richard uh and me and uh there's at the bottom there's another host uh a fourth host that is sort of sitting there on their site having your whole show that we've just done. Uh they may or may not pick up the transcript uh that I make for these shows and that I post on my site and send to you. And uh so it it seems to be that your uh show dialogue works appears on a a non dialogue works site, a whole different site with Richard and me with somebody else uh saying it. And I they even had the uh uh Hutzba uh to uh to write me and say we've got a lot of uh viewer response to the videos we've shown uh from you and Richard and Nema. uh will you be a guest on our site >> as if somehow that would uh legitimize them all? So, we're dealing with huge theft sp uh sponsored by YouTube because YouTube will uh get more advertising from this and let a hundred flowers bloom. And I suspect that the viewers on these uh plagiarized uh and uh plagiarized sites uh are not the kind of viewers that usually watch Neoth's show or that read what Richard and I write on our respective websites. That's Michaelen uh Hudson.com uh to be specific. Uh that's where you want to go. And I have a Patreon group. Richard has a group uh the uh we have our own sites but they are uh pirating what we do and it uh they're fake sites and uh even as Richard points out they've gone to fake content for us. That's the uh AI revolution. Whoever controls the uh the platform the AI platform controls the content and uh that it's the equivalent of Orwell. Who controls the past controls the present? Well, who controls the AI system? Garbage in, garbage out. Uh, that's that's what we're seeing. >> Yeah. The problem is that they're getting more views that the original video. [laughter] >> Yeah. Before wrapping up, Richard, here is I I want to put a clip of Donald Trump talking about tariffs before wrapping up this session. Richard, here is what Donald Trump said. I took in hundreds of billions of tariffs. I put tariffs on China very early. Then when we got hit with CO, we fought that. We did a very good job. But that was CO. It came from a certain place in China. You remember >> another great gift from China. >> China's another little gift we got. But look, I get along great with President Xi. I get along great with China. But the only way you're going to get along well with China is you have to deal from a position of strength. We have tremendous strength because of tariffs. We have tremendous strength because of what I've done. I've rebuilt our military and they have a lot of missiles, but we have a lot of missiles, too. And they don't want to mess around with us. >> Yeah. And >> Yeah. Well, you know, uh this is the country that invented the cowboy, and the cowboy mentality is widespread. Lots of little boys grow up with with a model of the very impressive fellow up on the horse shooting people that are usually browner skinned and and the cowboy and all the rest of it. And that's what we have here. You could have shown us a clip in which he explains with glee in his eye how he is killing those drug traffickers that he shoots in the boats and that when he finish with them they'll be dead and he says the word dead with as much intensity as he can muster. you know, killing drug trafficker. We arrest people in the drug trade in the United States every day. We have an enormous drug trade in this country and we arrest people one place or another every day. We never kill them whether they're guilty or innocent. We don't have capital punishment for the people in the drug trade until Mr. Trump decided to be the judge and the jury and the lawyer and the evidence and go directly from I see a person in a boat to executing them. It is it is so bad that the British intelligence agency h Well, what you're seeing here with his discussion about China and he rebuilt the military. It's all the same. It's all this elaborate theater of Mr. of Mr. Tough Guy. It it's not serious except that this is still a rich country. It still has a powerful military. It still can do damage. Mostly what the tariff program did is damage. And let me conclude with one thing. We are all now awaiting the decision of the Supreme Court as to whether the tariffs are a legal action or not. Now, here's why that's important. Regardless of what the outcome is, the president of the United States has attacked and damaged countless countries, countless corporations hurt by the tariffs. And he did that knowing that they might be unconstitutional. He put the country through an experience the costs of which will be enormous and already are when he didn't even know or take the time or trouble because he's a cowboy and reaches right for his gun. So he did the tariffs and now by the way one of his defenses recently pleading with the Supreme Court was to tell them how disruptive it would be of the world economy if he had to undo all the Exactly. How could you do that? What kind of a political leader does such a thing? Wow. We're talking about shooting from the hip in ways that already are and can be stupifyingly self-destructive. Aha, Richard, this is exactly what uh Trump is pl uh the the uh sword that Trump is holding over Central Asia. He can uh say that uh well uh if you're going to reorient your export to the United States, we can put tariffs on your exports and we can create chaos in you if uh you make any move uh to accommodate China, Russia, Iran or anyone on our enemies list. This is exactly uh by investing in uh Central Asian uh minerals, oil and other product. This gives Trump the ability to uh create chaos in them and uh to uh use the denial of the US market to create control. Uh uh Nema's uh quote showed Trump talking about missiles. Uh he's not going to use missiles in Southeast Asia. He's going to use al-Qaeda. Uh this is America's war of terror. They call it the war on terror, but it's a war of terror. It's using uh al-Qaeda assassinations, uh CIA assassinations, uh national endowment for democracy, uh uh regime change, uh and all of that. and they're going to try to bring al-Qaeda to uh any uh Central Asian countries that uh acts in a way that the United States does not like. And you'll see in Central Asia exactly what al-Qaeda did in uh Iraq in and in Syria and the fact that two days ago you had the al-Qaeda leader Galani uh appear at the White House shaking hands with uh Trump and playing basketball with the uh US sentcoms. uh now that well, you know, there's no longer a $10 million uh head uh plaque on your head. Uh keep killing the Christians. It's okay. Uh it's it's true that we're uh we accuse other countries of killing Christians uh and are opposing them. But you can kill Christians because you're our Christian killer, not their Christian Christian killer. You're seeing the hypocrisy of uh this whole uh uh whole just pretense, this paper tiger uh mask of the United States uh falling away, being stripped away in the last few days for them everyone to see. >> Yeah, I think we're about to wrap it up. Thank you so much, Richard and Michael, for being with us today. Great pleasure to talk to you too. >> Same here. And let let's hope that we uh made a little progress against the fake videos, too. >> Yeah. Hope so. [laughter] >> Yep. >> Not sure, but hope so. >> See you soon. Bye-bye.